Brihatparasarahorasastra 


Contents 

Ch.  1 .  The  Creation 

Ch.  2.  Great  Incarnations 

Ch.  3.  Grah  Characters  and  Description 

Ch.  4.  Zodiacal  Rasis  Described 

Ch.  5.  Special  Lagnas 

Ch.  6.  The  Sixteen  Divisions  of  a  Rasi 

Ch.  7.  Divisional  Considerations 

Ch.  8.  Drishtis  of  the  Rasis 

Ch.  9.  Evils  at  Birth 

Ch.  10.  Antidotes  for  Evils 

Ch.  11.  Judgement  of  Bhavas 

Ch.  12.  Effects  of  Tanu  Bhava 

Ch.  13.  Effects  of  Dhan  Bhava 

Ch.  14.  Effects  of  Sahai  Bhava 

Ch.  15.  Effects  of  Bandhu  Bhava 

Ch.  16.  Effects  of  Putr  Bhava 

Ch.  17.  Effects  of  Ari  Bhava 

Ch.  18.  Effects  of  Yuvati  Bhava 

Ch.  19.  Effects  of  Randhr  Bhava 

Ch.  20.  Effects  of  Dharm  Bhava 

Ch.  21.  Effects  of  Karm  Bhava 

Ch.  22.  Effects  of  Labh  Bhava 

Ch.  23.  Effects  of  Vyaya  Bhava 

Ch.  24.  Effects  of  the  Bhava  Lords 

Ch.  25.  Effects  of  Non-Luminous  Grahas 

Ch.  26.  Evaluation  of  Drishtis  of  Grahas 

Ch.  27.  Evaluation  Of  Strengths 

Ch.  28.  Isht  and  Kasht  Balas 

Ch.  29.  Bhava  Padas 

Ch.  30.  UpaPad 

Ch.  3 1 .  Argala,  or  Intervention  from  Grahas 

Ch.  32.  Karakatwas  of  the  Grahas 

Ch.  33.  Effects  of  Karakahs 

Ch.  34.  Yoga  Karakas 

Ch.  35.  Nabhash  Yogas 

Ch.  36.  Many  Other  Yogas 

Ch.  37.  Candr's  Yogas 

Ch.  38.  Surya's  Yogas 

Ch.  39.  Raj  Yog 

Ch.  40.  Yogas  For  Royal  Association 

Ch.  41.  Combinations  for  Wealth 


Ch.  42.  Combinations  for  Penury 

Ch.  43.  Longevity 

Ch.  44.  Marak  Grahas 

Ch.  45.  Avasthas  of  Grahas 

Ch.  46.  Pashas  of  Grahas 

Ch.  47.  Effects  of  Pashas 

Ch.  48.  Pistinctive  Effects  of  the  Nakshatr  Pasha,  or  of  the  Pashas  of  the  Lords 

(Vimshottari)  of  various  Bhavas 

Ch.  49.  Effects  of  the  Kaal  Chakr 

Ch.  50.  Effects  of  the  Char  etc.  Pashas 

Ch.  5 1 .  Working  out  of  Antar  Pashas  of  Grahas  and  Rasis  in  Vimshottari  etc.  Pasha 

systems 

Ch.  52.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Surya  (Vimshottari) 

Ch.  53.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Candr 

Ch.  54.  Effects  of  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Mangal 

Ch.  55.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Rahu 

Ch.  56.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Guru 

Ch.  57.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Sani 

Ch.  58.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Budh 

Ch.  59.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Ketu 

Ch.  60.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Pasha  of  Sukr 

Ch.  61.  Effects  of  Pratyantar  Pashas  in  Antar  Pashas 

Ch.  62.  Effects  of  Sukshmantar  Pashas  in  Pratyantar  Pashas 

Ch.  63.  Effects  of  Prana  Pashas  in  Sukshma  Pashas 

Ch.  64.  Effects  of  Antar  Pashas  in  the  Kala  Chakr 

Ch.  65.  Effects  of  Pashas  of  Rasis  in  the  Ahsas  of  the  Various  Rasis 

Ch.  66.  AshtakaVarg 

Ch.  67.  Trikon  Shodhana  in  the  AshtakaVarg 

Ch.  68.  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  in  the  AshtakaVarg 

Ch.  69.  Pinda  Sadhana  in  the  AshtakaVarg 

Ch.  70.  Effects  of  the  AshtakaVarg 

Ch.  71.  Petermination  of  Longevity  through  the  AshtakaVarg 

Ch.  72.  Aggregational  AshtakaVargas 

Ch.  73.  Effects  of  the  Rays  of  the  Grahas 

Ch.  74.  Effects  of  the  Sudarshana  Chakr 

Ch.  75.  Characteristic  Features  of  Panchmahapurushas 

Ch.  76.  Effects  of  the  Elements 

Ch.  77.  Effects  of  the  Gunas 

Ch.  78.  Lost  Horoscopy 

Ch.  79.  Ascetism  Yogas 

Ch.  80.  Female  Horoscopy 

Ch.  81.  Effects  of  Characteristic  Features  of  Parts  of  Woman's  body. 

Ch.  82.  Effects  of  Moles,  Marks,  Signs  etc.  for  Men  and  Women 

Ch.  83.  Effects  of  Curses  in  the  Previous  Birth 

Ch.  84.  Remedial  Measures  from  the  Malevolence  of  Grahas 

Ch.  85.  Inauspicious  Births 

Ch.  86.  Remedies  for  Amavasya  Birth 

Ch.  87.  Remedies  from  Birth  on  Krishna  Charurdashi 

Ch.  88.  Remedies  from  Birth  in  Bhadra  and  Inauspicious  Yogas 

Ch.  89.  Remedies  from  Nakshatr  Birth 


Ch.  90.  Remedies  from  Sankranti  Birth 

Ch.  91.  Remedies  for  Birth  in  Eclipses 

Ch.  92.  Remedies  from  Gandanta  Birth 

Ch.  93.  Remedies  for  Abhukta  Mula  Birth 

Ch.  94.  Remedies  from  Jyeshtha  Gandanta  Birth 

Ch.  95.  Remedies  from  Birth  of  a  Daughter  after  Three  Sons 

Ch.  96.  Remedies  from  Unusual  Delivery 

Ch.  97.  Conclusion 


Ch.  1.  The  Creation 

I  prostrate  before  the  lotus-feet  of  Lord  Vighneswara,  offspring  of  Uma,  the  cause  of 
destruction  of  sorrow,  who  is  served  by  Mahabhutas  (the  five  great  elements  of  the  universe) 
etc.,  who  has  the  face  of  a  tusker  and  who  consumes  the  essence  of  Kapittha  and  Jambu  fruits. 

1-4.  Offering  his  obeisance  to  all-knowing  Maharishi  Parasar  and  with  folded  hands,  Maitreya 
said:  "O  venerable  Maharishi,  Jyotish,  the  supreme  limb  of  the  Vedas,  has  three  divisions,  viz. 
Hora,  Ganita  and  Samhita.  Among  the  said  three  divisions  Hora,  or  the  general  part  of  Jyotish 
is  still  more  excellent.  I  desire  to  know  of  its  glorious  aspects  from  you.  Be  pleased  to  tell  me, 
how  this  Universe  is  created?  How  does  it  end?  What  is  the  relationship  of  the  animals,  born 
on  this  earth,  with  the  heavenly  bodies?  Please  speak  elaborately" 

5-8.  Maharishi  Parasar  answered.  O  Brahmin,  your  query  has  an  auspicious  purpose  in  it  for 
the  welfare  of  the  Universe.  Praying  Lord  Brahma  and  Sri  SarasvatI,  his  power  (and  consort) 
and  Surya,  the  leader  of  the  Grahas  and  the  cause  of  Creation,  I  shall  proceed  to  narrate  to  you 
the  science  of  Jyotish,  as  heard  through  Lord  Brahma.  Only  good  will  follow  the  teaching  of 
this  Vedic  Science  to  the  students,  who  are  peacefully  disposed,  who  honour  the  preceptors 
(and  elders),  who  speak  only  truth  and  are  godfearing.  Woeful  forever,  doubtlessly,  will  it  be 
to  impart  knowledge  of  this  science  to  an  unwilling  student,  to  a  heterodox  and  to  a  crafty 
person. 

9-12.  Sri  Vishnu,  who  is  the  Lord  (of  all  matters),  who  has  undefiled  spirit,  who  is  endowed 
with  the  three  Gunas,  although  he  transcends  the  grip  of  Gunas  (Gunatita),  who  is  the  Author 
of  this  Universe,  who  is  glorious,  who  is  the  Cause  and  who  is  endowed  with  valour,  has  no 
beginning.  He  authored  the  Universe  and  administers  it  with  a  quarter  of  his  power.  The  other 
three  quarters  of  Him,  filled  with  nectar,  are  knowable  only  to  the  philosophers  (of  maturity). 
The  Principal  Evolver,  who  is  both  perceptible  and  imperceptible  in  Vasudeva.  The 
Imperceptible  part  of  the  Lord  is  endowed  with  dual  powers,  while  the  Perceptible  with  triple 
powers. 

13-15.  The  three  powers  are  Sri  Shakti  (Mother  Lakshmi)  with  Sattva-Gun,  Bhu  Shakti 
(Mother-Earth)  with  Rajo-Gun  and  Ml  Shakti  with  Tamo-Gun.  Apart  from  the  three,  the 
fourth  kind  of  Vishnu,  influenced  by  Sri  Shakti  and  Bhoo  Shakti,  assumes  the  form  of 
Shankarshan  with  Tamo-Gun,  of  Pradyumna  with  Rajo-Gun  and  of  Anirudh  with  Sattva-Gun. 

16-17.  Mahatatwa,  Ahamkar  and  Ahamkar  Murti  and  Brahma,  are  born  from  Shankarshan, 
Pradyumna  and  Anirudh,  respectively.  All  these  three  forms  are  endowed  with  all  the  three 
Gunas,  with  predominance  of  the  Gun  due  to  their  origin. 


18-19.  Ahamkar  is  of  three  classes,  i.e.  with  Sattvic,  Rajasic  and  Tamasic  dispositions.  Divine 
class,  sensory  organs  and  the  five  primordial  compounds  (space,  air,  fire,  water  and  earth)  are, 
respectively,  from  the  said  three  Ahamkaras. 

20.  Lord  Vishnu,  coupled  with  Sri  Shakti,  rules  over  the  three  worlds.  Coupled  with  Bhoo 
Shakti,  He  is  Brahma  causing  the  Universe.  Coupled  with  Neel  Shakti,  He  is  Shiva, 
destroying  the  Universe. 

21-24.  The  Lord  is  in  all  beings  and  the  entire  Universe  is  in  Him.  All  beings  contain  both 
Jivatma  and  Paramatmahsas.  Some  have  predominance  of  the  former,  while  yet  some  have  the 
latter  in  predominance.  Paramatmahs  is  predominant  in  the  Grahas,  viz.  Surya  etc.  and 
Brahma,  Shiva  and  others.  Their  powers,  or  consorts  too  have  predominance  of  Paramatmahs. 
Others  have  more  of  Jivatmahs. 

Ch.  2.  Great  Incarnations 

1.  Maitreya:  "O  Maharishi  Parasar,  are  the  incarnations  of  Vishnu,  viz.  Sri  Ram,  Sri  Krishn 
etc.,  endowed  with  Jivahs? 

2.  Maharishi  Parashar:  "O  Brahmin,  the  four  incarnations,  viz.  Ram,  Krishn,  Narasimh  and 
Varah  are  wholly  with  Paramatmahs.  The  other  incarnations  (than  these,  out  of  the  ten)  have 
in  them  Jivahs  too. 

3-4.  The  unborn  Lord  has  many  incarnations.  He  has  incarnated,  as  the  9  (Nava)  Grahas  to 
bestow  on  the  living  beings  the  results  due  to  their  Karmas.  He  is  Janardan.  He  assumed  the 
auspicious  form  of  Grahas  to  destroy  the  demons  (evil  forces)  and  sustain  the  divine  beings. 

5-7.  From  Surya  the  incarnation  of  Ram,  from  Candr  that  of  Krishn,  from  Mangal  that  of 
Narasimh,  from  Budh  that  of  Buddha,  from  Guru  that  of  Vaman,  from  Sukr  that  of 
Parashuram,  from  Sani  that  of  Kurma  (Tortoise),  from  Rahu  that  of  Varah  (Pig)  and  from 
Ketu  that  of  Meen  (Fish)  occurred.  All  other  incarnations  than  these  also  are  through  the 
Grahas.  The  beings  with  more  Paramatmahs  are  called  divine  beings. 

8-13.  The  beings  with  more  Jivatmahs  are  (mortal)  beings.  The  high  degree  of  Paramatmahs 
from  the  Grahas,  viz.  Surya  etc.  did  incarnate,  as  Ram,  Krishn  etc.  After  completing  the 
mission,  the  Paramatmahsas  (of  the  respective)  Grahas  again  merge  (in  the  respective) 
Grahas.  The  Jivatma  portions  from  the  Grahas  take  births,  as  human  beings  and  live  their  lives 
according  to  their  Karmas  and  again  merge  in  the  Grahas.  And  at  the  time  of  Great 
Destruction  the  Grahas  as  well  merge  in  Lord  Vishnu.  The  one,  who  knows  of  all  these,  will 
become  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  past,  present  and  future.  Without  a  knowledge  of 
Jyotish  these  cannot  be  known.  Hence,  everyone  should  have  a  knowledge  of  Jyotish, 
particularly  the  Brahmin.  The  one,  who,  devoid  of  knowledge  of  Jyotish,  blames  this  Vedic 
Science  will  go  to  the  hell  called  'Raurava'  and  will  be  reborn  blind. 

Ch.  3.  Grah  Characters  and  Description 

1.  Maitreya:  "O  Maharishi,  you  have  affectionately  explained  about  the  incarnations  of 
Grahas.  Now  kindly  detail  their  characters  and  dispositions. 


2-3.  Parasar:  "O  Brahmin,  listen  to  the  account  of  placement  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Out  of 
the  many  luminous  bodies  sighted  in  the  skies  some  are  stars,  yet  some  are  Grahas.  Those, 
that  have  no  movements,  are  the  Nakshatras  (asterisms). 

4-6.  Those  are  called  'Grahas',  that  move  through  the  Nakshatras  (or  stellar  mansions)  in  the 
zodiac.  The  said  zodiac  comprises  of  27  Nakshatras  commencing  from  Ashvini.  The  same 
area  is  divided  in  12  parts  equal  to  12  'Rasis'  commencing  from  Mesh.  The  names  of  the 
Grahas  commence  from  Surya.  The  Rasi  rising  is  known,  as  'Lagn'.  Based  on  Lagn  and  the 
Grahas,  joining  and  departing  from  each  other,  the  native's  good  and  bad  effects  are  deducted. 

Addition  from  Santhanam  till  Sloka  7.  The  names  of  the  27  Nakshatras  are  Ashvini,  Bharani, 
Krittika,  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Ardra,  Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Aslesha,  Magha,  Purvaphalguni, 
Uttaraphalguni,  Hasta,  Chitra,  Swati,  Vishaka,  Anuradha,  Jyeshtha,  Mula,  Purvashadh, 
Uttarashadh,  Shravana,  Dhanishtha,  Satabhisha,  Purvabhadra,  Uttarabhadra,  Revati. 

Lagn  is  a  very  important  point  in  the  horoscope.  It  is  the  Rasi,  that  rises  in  the  East,  on  the 
latitude  of  birth.  The  apparent  rising  of  a  Rasi  is  due  to  the  rotation  of  the  earth  on  its  own 
axis  at  a  rate  of  motion,  causing  every  degree  of  the  zodiac  seemingly  ascend  on  the  eastern 
horizon. 

Approximately,  two  hours  are  required  for  a  Rasi  to  pass  via  the  horizon,  thereby  every 
degree  taking  four  minutes  to  ascend.  This  duration,  however,  is  actually  dependent  on  the 
concerned  latitude. 

Actually  Surya  has  no  motion.  His  motion  is  an  apparent  one,  as  viewed  from  the  rotating 
earth.  Other  Grahas,  including  the  nodes,  have  varied  rates  of  motion.  The  average  daily 
motions  of  the  Grahas,  which  are  not,  however  standard,  are,  as  follows:  Surya  1,  Candr  13- 
15,  Mangal  30-45',  Budh  65-100',  Sukr  62-82',  Guru  5-15',  Sani  2',  Rahu/Ketu  3'. 

With  such  different  motions,  a  Grah  forms  various  Drishtis  with  others.  These  Drishtis 
through  longitudinal  distances  have  a  great  deal  of  utility  in  Jyotish.  This  is  what  Maharishi 
Parashar  suggests  to  be  considered. 

7.  Details  (of  astronomical  nature)  of  stars  have  to  be  understood  by  general  rules,  while  I 
narrate  to  you  about  the  effects  of  Grahas  and  Rasis. 

8-9.  The  positions  of  the  Grahas  for  a  given  time  be  taken,  as  per  Drikganit.  And  with  the  help 
of  Rasi  durations,  applicable  to  the  respective  places,  Lagn  at  birth  should  be  known.  Now,  I 
tell  you  about  the  castes,  descriptions  and  dispositions  of  the  Grahas. 

10.  Names  of  Grahas.  The  names  of  the  nine  Grahas,  respectively,  are  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal, 
Budh,  Guru,  Sukr,  Sani,  Rahu  and  Ketu. 

1 1 .  Benefics  and  Malefics.  Among  these,  Surya,  Sani,  Mangal,  decreasing  Candr,  Rahu  and 
Ketu  (the  ascending  and  the  descending  nodes  of  Candr)  are  malefics,  while  the  rest  are 
benefics.  Budh,  however,  is  a  malefic,  if  he  joins  a  malefic. 

Addition  from  Santhanam  till  Sloka  12-13.  When  Candr  is  ahead  of  Surya,  but  within  120, 
she  has  medium  strength.  Between  120  to  240  she  is  very  auspicious,(  see  'Atishubhapred'). 
From  240  to  0  she  is  bereft  of  strength.  This  is  Yavanas'  view,  vide  P.  70  of  my  English 


Translation  of  Saravali.  This  view  is,  however,  related  to  Candr's  strength,  or  otherwise, 
while  waning  Candr  (Krishna  Paksh,  dark  half)  is  a  malefic  and  waxing  Candr  (Shukla  Paksh, 
bright  half)  is  a  benefic.  Should  Candr  be  Yuti  with  a  benefic,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  a 
benefic,  she  turns  a  benefic,  even  if  in  a  waning  state.  As  regards  Budh,  we  have  clear 
instructions  from  Maharishi  Parashar,  that  he  becomes  a  malefic,  if  he  joins  a  malefic.  If 
waning  Candr  and  Budh  are  together,  both  are  benefics. 

12-13.  Grah  governances.  Surya  is  the  soul  of  all.  Candr  is  the  mind.  Mangal  is  one's  strength. 
Budh  is  speech-giver,  while  Guru  confers  Knowledge  and  happiness.  Sukr  governs  semen 
(potency),  while  Sani  denotes  grief. 

14-15.  Grah  cabinet.  Of  royal  status  are  Surya  and  Candr,  while  Mangal  is  the  Army  chief. 
Prince-apparent  is  Budh.  The  ministerial  Grahas  are  Guru  and  Sukr.  Sani  is  a  servant.  Rahu 
and  Ketu  form  the  Grah  Army. 

16-17.  Complexions  of  Grahas.  Surya  is  blood-red.  Candr  is  tawny.  Mangal,  who  is  not  very 
tall  is  blood-red,  while  Budh's  hue  is  akin  to  that  of  green  grass.  Tawny,  variegated  and  dark 
are  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani  in  their  order. 

18.  Deities  of  Grahas.  Fire  (Agni)  (?),  Water  (Varuna),  Subrahmanya  (Lord  Shiva's  son, 
following  Ganesh),  Maha  Vishnu,  Indra,  Shachi  Devi  (the  consort  of  Lord  Indra)  and  Brahma 
(?)  are  the  presiding  deities  of  the  7  Grahas  in  their  order. 

19.  Gender  of  the  Grahas.  Budh  and  Sani  are  neuters.  Candr  and  Sukr  are  females,  while 
Surya,  Mangal  and  Guru  are  males. 

20.  Primordial  compounds.  The  Panchabhutas,  space,  air,  fire,  water  and  earth,  are, 
respectively,  governed  by  Guru,  Sani,  Mangal,  Sukr  and  Budh. 

21.  Castes  of  Grahas.  Guru  and  Sukr  are  Brahmins.  Surya  is  a  royal  Grah,  while  Candr  and 
Budh  belong  to  commercial  community.  Sani  rules  the  Sudras  (4th  caste). 

22.  Sattvic  Grahas  are  the  luminaries  and  Guru,  Sukr  and  Budh  are  Rajasik,  while  Mangal  and 
Sani  are  Tamasic. 

23.  Description  of  Surya.  Surya' s  eyes  are  honey-coloured.  He  has  a  square  body.  He  is  of 
clean  habits,  bilious,  intelligent  and  has  limited  hair  (on  his  head). 

24.  Description  of  Candr.  Candr  is  very  windy  and  phlegmatic.  She  is  learned  and  has  a  round 
body.  She  has  auspicious  looks  and  sweet  speech,  is  fickle-minded  and  very  lustful. 

25.  Description  of  Mangal.  Mangal  has  blood-red  eyes,  is  fickle-minded,  liberal,  bilious, 
given  to  anger  and  has  thin  waist  and  thin  physique. 

26.  Description  of  Budh.  Budh  is  endowed  with  an  attractive  physique  and  the  capacity  to  use 
words  with  many  meanings.  He  is  fond  of  jokes.  He  has  a  mix  of  all  the  three  humours. 

27.  Description  of  Guru.  Guru  has  a  big  body,  tawny  hair  and  tawny  eyes,  is  phlegmatic, 
intelligent  and  learned  in  Shastras. 


28.  Description  of  Sukr.  Sukr  is  charming,  has  a  splendourous  physique,  is  excellent,  or  great 
in  disposition,  has  charming  eyes,  is  a  poet,  is  phlegmatic  and  windy  and  has  curly  hair. 

29.  Description  of  Sani.  Sani  has  an  emaciated  and  long  physique,  has  tawny  eyes,  is  windy  in 
temperament,  has  big  teeth,  is  indolent  and  lame  and  has  coarse  hair. 

30.  Description  of  Rahu  and  Ketu.  Rahu  has  smoky  appearance  with  a  blue  mix  physique.  He 
resides  in  forests  and  is  horrible.  He  is  windy  in  temperament  and  is  intelligent.  Ketu  is  akin 
to  Rahu. 

31.  Primary  ingredients  (or  Sapth  Dhatus).  Bones,  blood,  marrow,  skin,  fat,  semen  and 
muscles  are,  respectively,  denoted  by  the  Grahas:  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr 
and  Sani. 

32.  Abodes  of  the  Grahas.  Temple,  watery  place,  place  of  fire,  sport-ground,  treasure-house, 
bed-room  and  filthy  ground:  these  are,  respectively,  the  abodes  for  the  seven  Grahas  from 
Surya  onward. 

33.  Grah  periods.  Ayan,  Muhurta,  a  day  (consisting  day  and  night),  Ritu,  month,  fortnight  and 
year:  these  are  the  periods  allotted  to  the  Grahas  from  Surya  to  Sani. 

34.  Tastes  of  the  Grahas.  Pungent,  saline,  bitter,  mixed,  sweet,  acidulous  and  astringent  are, 
respectively,  tastes  lorded  by  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani. 

35-38.  Strengths  of  Grahas.  Strong  in  the  East  are  Budh  and  Guru.  Surya  and  Mangal  are  so  in 
the  South,  while  Sani  is  the  only  Grah,  that  derives  strength  in  the  West.  Candr  and  Sukr  are 
endowed  with  vigour,  when  in  the  North.  Again,  strong  during  night  are  Candr,  Mangal  and 
Sani,  while  Budh  is  strong  during  day  and  night.  The  rest  (i.e.  Guru,  Surya  and  Sukr)  are 
strong  only  in  daytime.  During  the  dark  half  malefics  are  strong.  Benefics  acquire  strength  in 
the  bright  half  of  the  month.  Malefics  and  benefics  are,  respectively,  strong  in  Dakshinayan 
and  Uttarayan.  The  Lords  of  the  year,  month,  day  and  Hora  (hour  of  Grah)  are  stronger  than 
the  other  in  ascending  order.  Again,  stronger  than  the  other  in  the  ascending  are  Sani,  Mangal, 
Budh,  Guru,  Sukr,  Candr  and  Surya. 

39-40.  Related  to  trees.  Surya  rules  strong  trees  (i.e.  trees  with  stout  trunks),  Sani  useless 
trees,  Candr  milky  trees  (and  rubber  yielding  plants),  Mangal  bitter  ones  (like  lemon  plants), 
Sukr  floral  plants,  Guru  fruitful  ones  and  Budh  fruitless  ones. 

41-44.  Other  matters.  Rahu  rules  the  outcaste,  while  Ketu  governs  mixed  caste.  Sani  and  the 
nodes  indicate  ant-hills.  Rahu  denotes  multi-coloured  clothes  and  Ketu  rags.  Lead  and  blue 
gem  belong  to  Rahu  and  Ketu.  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani  in  their 
order  govern  red  silken,  white  silken,  red,  black  silken,  saffron,  silken  and  multi-coloured 
robes. 

45-46.  Seasons  of  Grahas.  Vasanta,  Greeshma,  Varsh,  Sarad,  Hemanta  and  Sisir  are  the  six 
Ritus  (or  seasons),  respectively,  governed  by  Sukr,  Mangal,  Candr,  Budh,  Guru  and  Sani. 
Rahu  and  Ketu  denote  8  months  and  3  months,  respectively. 

47.  Dhatu,  Mool  and  Jiva  Divisions.  Dhatu  Grahas  are  Rahu,  Mangal,  Sani  and  Candr,  while 
Surya  and  Sukr  are  Mula  Grahas.  Budh,  Guru  and  Ketu  rule  Jivas. 


48.  Age.  Out  of  all  the  Grahas  Sani  is  the  eldest.  He  bestows  maximum  number  of  years  in 
Naisargik  Dasha. 

49-50.  Exaltation  and  Debilitation.  For  the  seven  Grahas,  from  Surya  on,  the  exaltation  Rasis 
are,  respectively,  Mesh,  Vrishabh,  Makar,  Kanya,  Kark,  Meen  and  Tula.  The  deepest 
exaltation  degrees  are,  respectively,  10,  3,  28,  15,  5,  27  and  20  in  those  Rasis.  And  in  the 
seventh  Rasi  from  the  said  exaltation  Rasi  each  Grah  has  its  own  debilitation.  The  same 
degrees  of  deep  exaltation  apply  to  deep  fall. 

51-54.  Additional  Dignities.  In  Simh  the  first  20  degrees  are  Surya' s  Mooltrikon,  while  the 
rest  is  his  own  Bhava.  After  the  first  3  degrees  of  exaltation  portion  in  Vrishabh,  for  Candr, 
the  rest  is  her  Mooltrikon.  Mangal  has  the  first  12  degrees  in  Mesh,  as  Mooltrikon  with  the 
rest  therein  becoming  simply  his  own  Bhava.  For  Budh,  in  Kanya  the  first  15  degrees  are 
exaltation  zone,  the  next  5  degrees  Mooltrikon  and  the  last  10  degrees  are  own  Bhava.  The 
first  one  third  of  Dhanu  is  the  Mooltrikon  of  Guru,  while  the  remaining  part  thereof  is  his  own 
Bhava.  Sukr  divides  Tula  into  two  halves  keeping  the  first,  as  Mooltrikon  and  the  second,  as 
own  Bhava.  Sani's  arrangements  are  same  in  Kumbh,  as  Surya  has  in  Simh. 

55.  Natural  Relationships.  Note  the  Rasis,  which  are  the  2nd,  4th,  5th,  8th,  9th  and  12th  from  the 
Mooltrikon  of  a  Grah.  The  Grahas  ruling  such  Rasis  are  its  friends,  apart  from  the  Lord  of  its 
exaltation  Rasi.  Lords  other  than  these  are  its  enemies.  If  a  Grah  becomes  its  friend  as  well,  as 
its  enemy  (on  account  of  the  said  two  computations),  then  it  is  neutral,  or  equal. 

56.  Temporary  Relationships.  The  Grah,  posited  in  the  2nd,  3rd,  4th,  10th,  1 1th,  or  the  12th  from 
another,  becomes  a  mutual  friend.  There  is  enmity  otherwise.  (This  applies  to  a  given  Janm 
Kundali) 

57-58.  Compound  Relationship.  Should  two  Grahas  be  naturally  and  temporarily  friendly, 
they  become  extremely  friendly.  Friendship  on  one  count  and  neutrality  on  another  count 
make  them  friendly.  Enmity  on  one  count  combined  with  affinity  on  the  other  turns  into 
equality.  Enmity  and  neutralship  cause  only  enmity.  Should  there  be  enmity  in  both  manners, 
extreme  enmity  is  obtained.  The  Jyotishi  should  consider  these  and  declare  horoscopic  effects 
accordingly. 

59-60.  Ratio  of  Effects.  A  Grah  in  exaltation  gives  fully  good  effects,  while  in  Mooltrikon  it  is 
bereft  of  its  auspicious  effects  by  one  fourth.  It  is  half  beneficial  in  its  own  Bhava.  Its 
beneficence  is  one  fourth  in  a  friendly  Rasi.  In  an  equal's  Rasi  one  eighth  of  auspicious 
disposition  is  useful.  The  good  effects  are  nil  in  debilitation,  or  enemy's  camp.  Inauspicious 
effects  are  quite  reverse  with  reference  to  what  is  stated. 

61-64.  Non-luminous  UpaGrahas  (Sub-Grahas).  Add  4  Rasis  13  degrees  and  20  minutes  of 
arc  to  Surya' s  longitude  at  a  given  moment  to  get  the  exact  position  of  the  all  inauspicious 
Dhoom.  Reduce  Dhoom  from  12  Rasis  to  arrive  at  Vyatipat.  Vyatipat  is  also  inauspicious. 
Add  six  Rasis  to  Vyatipat  to  know  the  position  of  Parivesh.  He  is  extremely  inauspicious. 
Deduct  Parivesh  from  12  Rasis  to  arrive  at  the  position  of  Chap  (Indra  Dhanus),  who  is  also 
inauspicious.  Add  16  degrees  40  minutes  to  Chap,  which  will  give  Ketu  (UpaKetu),  who  is  a 
malefic.  By  adding  a  Rasi  to  UpaKetu,  you  get  the  original  longitude  of  Surya.  These  are  the 
Grahas,  devoid  of  splendour,  which  are  malefics  by  nature  and  cause  affliction. 


65.  Effects  of  Sub-Grahas.  If  one  of  these  afflicts  Surya,  the  native's  dynasty  will  decline, 
while  Candr  and  Lagn,  respectively,  associated  with  one  of  these,  will  destroy  the  longevity 
and  wisdom.  So  declared  Lord  Brahma,  the  Lotus-Born. 

66-69.  Calculations  of  Gulik  etc.  The  portions  of  Surya  etc.  up  to  Sani  denote  the  periods  of 
Gulik  and  others.  Divide  the  day  duration  (of  any  week  day)  into  eight  equal  parts.  The  eighth 
portion  is  Lord-less.  The  seven  portions  are  distributed  to  the  seven  Grahas  commencing  from 
the  Lord  of  the  week  day.  Whichever  portion  is  ruled  by  Sani,  will  be  the  portion  of  Gulik. 
Similarly  make  the  night  duration  into  eight  equal  parts  and  distribute  these,  commencing 
from  the  Lord  of  the  5th  (by)  week.  Here  again,  the  eighth  portion  is  Lord-less,  while  Sani's 
portion  is  Gulik.  Surya' s  portion  is  Kaal,  Mangal's  portion  is  Mrityu,  Guru's  portion  is 
Yamaghantak  and  Budh's  portion  is  Ardhaprahar.  These  durations  differently  apply  to 
different  places  (commensurate  with  variable  day  and  night  durations). 

70.  Gulik' s  Position.  The  degree,  ascending  at  the  time  of  start  of  Gulik' s  portion  (as  above), 
will  be  the  longitude  of  Gulik  at  a  given  place.  Based  on  this  longitude  only,  Gulik' s  effects 
for  a  particular  nativity  be  estimated. 

71-74.  Calculation  of  Pranapad.  Convert  the  given  time  into  Vighatis  and  divide  the  same  by 
15.  The  resultant  Rasi,  degrees  etc.  be  added  to  Surya,  if  he  is  in  a  Movable  Rasi,  which  will 
yield  Pranapad.  If  Surya  is  in  a  Fixed  Rasi,  add  240  degrees  additionally  and,  if  in  a  Dual 
Rasi,  add  120  degrees  in  furtherance  to  get  Pranapad.  The  birth  will  be  auspicious,  if 
Pranapad  falls  in  the  2nd,  5th,  9th,  4th,  10th,  or  1 1th  from  the  natal  Lagn.  In  other  Bhavas 
Pranapad  indicates  an  inauspicious  birth. 

Notes.  Ardhaprahar,  Yamaghantak,  Mrityu,  Kaal  and  Gulik  are  the  5  Kaal  Velas,  suggested 
by  Maharishi  Parashar.  The  day  duration,  according  to  altitude,  is  divided  into  eight  equal 
parts.  The  eighth  portion  is  unlorded.  The  first  portion  is  allotted  to  the  weekday  Lord.  Other 
portions  follow  in  the  order  of  weekday  Lords.  We  consider  5  portions  of  Grahas,  ignoring 
that  of  Candr  and  Sukr.  The  portions  of  Surya,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru  and  Sani  are, 
respectively,  called  Kaal,  Mrityu,  Ardhaprahar,  Yamaghantak  and  Gulik. 

In  the  case  of  night  the  durations,  or  l/8th  parts  are  allotted  in  a  different  order.  The  first 
portion  goes  to  the  Grah,  ruling  the  5th  weekday  Lord,  counted  from  the  day  in  question.  The 
others  follow  in  the  usual  order.  Here  again,  the  8th  part  is  Lord-less.  The  portions  of  Grahas 
from  Kaal  to  Gulik  are  the  same  in  nomenclature  in  the  night  also. 

Keeranuru  NataRaja  of  Jatakalankaram  (Tamil  version)  gives  Rasis  of  dignities  for  these 
UpaGrahas  and  Gulik  etc.  (UpaGrah  &  Gulik  etc. :  Exaltation,  Debilitation,  Swakshetra  (own 
Rasi))  Dhoom:  Simh,  Kumbh,  Makar;  Vyatipat:  Vrischik,  Vrishabh,  Mithun;  Parivesh: 
Mithun,  Dhanu,  Dhanu;  Indrachap:  Dhanu,  Mithun,  Kark;  UpaKetu:  Kumbh,  Simh,  Kark; 
Gulik:  -,  -,  Kumbh;  Yamaghantak:  -,  -,  Dhanu;  Ardhaprahar:  -,  -,  Mithun;  Kaal:  -,  -,  Makar; 
Mrityu:  -,  -,  Vrischik. 

From  Surya  to  Sani  no  one  is  exalted  in  the  above-mentioned  exaltation  Rasis,  nor  debilitated 
in  the  above-mentioned  debilitation  Rasis. 

Out  of  the  5  Kaal  Velas,  viz.  Gulik  etc.,  four  except  Kaal  (related  to  Surya)  have  their  own 
Rasi  system  in  the  respective  Rasis,  ruled  by  their  fathers.  Gulik,  son  of  Sani,  has  Kumbh,  as 
his  own  Bhava.  Guru's  son,  Yamaghantak,  has  it  in  Dhanu.  Ardhaprahar,  Budh's  son,  is  in 


own  Rasi,  if  in  Mithun.  Mrityu,  son  of  Mangal,  has  Vrischik,  as  own  Bhava.  It  is  not  known, 
why  Kaal,  a  son  of  Surya  shifted  to  Makar,  a  Rasi  of  his  brother  (Sani),  leaving  his  father's 
Simh.  Obviously,  Sani  has  given  his  Mooltrikon  to  his  son  Gulik,  while  he  gave  Makar  (a 
secondary  Rasi)  to  his  'brother'  Kaal. 

Ch.  4.  Zodiacal  Rasis  Described 

1-2.  Importance  of  Hora.  The  word  Hora  is  derived  from  Ahoratr  after  dropping  the  first  and 
last  syllables.  Thus  Hora  (Lagnas)  remains  in  between  Ahoratr  (i.e.  day  and  night)  and  after 
knowing  Hora  the  good  and  bad  effects  of  a  native  be  known.  Sri  Vishnu,  the  Invisible  is 
Time  personified.  His  limbs  are  the  12  Rasis,  commencing  from  Mesh. 

3.  Names  of  Rasis.  The  12  Rasis  of  the  zodiac  in  order  are  Mesh,  Vrishabh,  Mithun,  Kark, 
Simh,  Kanya,  Tula,  Vrischik,  Dhanu,  Makar,  Kumbh  and  Meen. 

4-4 Vi.  Limbs  of  Kaal  Purush.  Kaal  Purush  (or  Time  personified)  has  his  limbs,  as  under  with 
reference  to  the  12  Rasis,  respectively:  Head,  face,  arms,  heart,  stomach,  hip,  space  below 
navel,  privities,  thighs,  knees,  ankles  and  feet. 

5SV2.  Classification  of  Rasis.  Movable,  Fixed  and  Dual  are  the  names  given  to  the  12  Rasis  in 
order.  These  are  again  known,  as  malefic  and  benefic,  successively.  Similarly  are  male  and 
female.  Mesh,  Simh  and  Dhanu  are  bilious.  Vrishabh,  Kanya  and  Makar  are  windy.  Mithun, 
Tula  and  Kumbh  are  mixed,  while  the  rest  are  phlegmatic. 

6-7.  Mesh  described.  The  Mesh  is  blood-red  in  complexion.  It  has  a  prominent  (big)  physique. 
It  is  a  quadruped  Rasi  and  strong  during  night.  It  denotes  courage.  It  resides  in  the  East  and  is 
related  to  kings.  It  wanders  in  hills  and  predominates  in  Rajo-Gun  (the  second  of  the  three 
constituent  qualities  and  the  cause  of  great  activity  in  living  beings).  It  rises  with  its  back  (a 
Prishtodaya  Rasi)  and  is  fiery.  Its  ruler  is  Mangal. 

8.  Vrishabh  described.  Vrishabh's  complexion  is  white  and  it  is  lorded  by  Sukr.  It  is  long  and 
is  a  quadruped  Rasi.  It  has  strength  in  night  and  resides  in  the  South.  It  represents  villages  and 
businessmen.  An  earthy  Rasi,  Vrishabh  rises  with  its  back. 

9-9lA.  Mithun  described.  The  Rasi  Mithun  rises  with  its  head  and  represents  a  male  and  a 
female,  holding  a  mace  and  lute.  It  lives  in  the  West  and  is  an  airy  Rasi.  It  is  a  biped  Rasi  as 
well  and  is  strong  in  nights.  It  lives  in  villages  and  is  windy  in  temperament.  It  has  an  even 
body  with  a  green  (grass  like)  hue.  Its  ruler  is  Budh. 

10-11.  Kark  described.  The  Rasi  Kark  is  pale-red.  It  resorts  to  forests  and  represents 
Brahmins.  It  is  strong  in  nights.  It  has  many  feet  (i.e.  it  is  a  centipede  Rasi)  and  has  a  bulky 
body.  It  is  Sattvic  in  disposition  (seen  in  gods)  and  it  is  a  watery  Rasi.  It  rises  with  its  back 
and  is  ruled  by  Candr. 

12.  Simh  described.  Simh  is  ruled  by  Surya  and  is  Sattvic.  It  is  a  quadruped  Rasi  and  a  royal 
Rasi.  It  resorts  to  forests  and  rises  with  its  head.  It  has  a  large,  white  body.  It  resides  in  the 
East  and  is  strong  during  daytime. 

13-14.  Kanya  described.  This  Rasi  is  a  hill-resorter  and  is  strong  in  daytime.  It  rises  with  its 
head  and  has  a  medium  build.  It  is  a  biped  Rasi  and  resides  in  the  South.  It  has  grains  and  fire 


in  its  hands.  It  belongs  to  the  business  community  and  is  variegated.  It  relates  to  hurricanes 
('Prabharanjani').  It  is  a  Virgin  and  is  Tamasic  (a  disposition  of  demons).  Its  ruler  is  Budh. 

15-161/4.  Tula  described.  Tula  is  a  Seershodaya  Rasi,  rising  with  its  head;  Tula  is  strong  in 
daytime.  It  is  black  in  complexion  and  is  predominant  with  Rajo-Gun.  It  relates  to  the  western 
direction  and  resorts  to  land.  It  is  destructive,  or  mischievous  ('Dhatin').  It  represents  Sudras, 
or  the  4th  Varna.  It  has  a  medium  build  physique  and  is  a  biped  Rasi.  Its  Lord  is  Sukr. 
Vrischik  described.  Vrischik  has  a  slender  physique  and  is  a  centipede  Rasi.  It  denotes 
Brahmins  and  resides  in  holes.  Its  direction  is  North  and  it  is  strong  in  daytime.  It  is  reddish- 
brown  and  resorts  to  water  and  land.  It  has  a  hairy  physique  and  is  very  sharp  (or  passionate). 
Mangal  is  its  ruler. 

17-18V2.  Dhanu  described.  The  Rasi  Dhanu  rises  with  its  head  and  is  lorded  by  Guru.  It  is  a 
Sattvic  Rasi  and  is  tawny  in  hue.  It  has  strength  in  night  and  is  fiery.  A  royal  Rasi,  Dhanu  is 
biped  in  first  half.  Its  second  half  is  quadruped.  It  has  an  even  build  and  adores  an  arch.  It 
resides  in  the  East,  resorts  to  land  and  is  splendourous. 

19-20.  Makar  described.  Makar  is  lorded  by  Sani  and  has  predominance  of  Tamo-Gun  (a 
disposition,  seen  in  demons).  It  is  an  earthy  Rasi  and  represents  the  southern  direction.  It  is 
strong  in  nights  and  rises  with  back.  It  has  a  large  body.  Its  complexion  is  variegated  and  it 
resorts  to  both  forests  and  lands.  Its  first  half  is  quadruped  and  its  second  half  footless, 
moving  in  water. 

2 1-2  PA  Kumbh  described.  The  Rasi  Kumbh  represents  a  man  holding  a  pot.  Its  complexion 
is  deep-brown.  It  has  medium  build  and  is  a  biped  Rasi.  It  is  very  strong  in  daytime.  It  resorts 
to  deep  water  and  is  airy.  It  rises  with  its  head  and  is  Tamasic.  It  rules  Sudras,  the  4th  Varna 
and  the  West.  Its  Lord  is  Sani,  Surya's  offspring. 

22-24.  Meen  described.  Meen  resembles  a  pair  offish,  one  tailed  with  the  head  of  the  other. 
This  Rasi  is  strong  at  night.  It  is  a  watery  Rasi  and  is  predominant  with  Sattva-Gun.  It  denotes 
resoluteness  and  is  a  water-resorter.  It  is  footless  and  has  a  medium  build.  It  rules  the  North 
and  rises  with  both  head  and  back.  It  is  ruled  by  Guru.  This  is  how  the  twelve  Rasis,  each  of 
30  degrees  extent,  are  described  to  evaluate  gross  and  specific  effects. 

25-30.  Nishek  Lagn.  O  excellent  of  Brahmins,  now  is  a  step  explained  to  arrive  at  the  Nishek 
Lagn,  when  the  natal  Lagn  is  known.  Note  the  angular  distance  between  Sani  and  Mandi 
(Gulik).  Add  this  to  the  difference  between  the  Lagn  Bhava  (Madhya,  or  cusp)  and  the  9th 
Bhava  (cusp).  The  resultant  product  in  Rasis,  degrees  etc.  will  represent  the  months,  days  etc., 
that  elapsed  between  Nishek  and  birth.  At  birth,  if  Lagn  Lord  is  in  the  invisible  half  (i.e.  from 
Lagn  cusp  to  descendental  cusp),  add  the  degrees  etc.,  Candr  moved  in  the  particular  Rasi, 
occupied  by  her,  to  the  above-mentioned  product.  Then  Lagn  at  Nishek  can  be  worked  out 
and  the  good  and  bad,  experienced  by  the  native  in  the  womb,  can  be  guessed.  One  can  also 
guess  with  the  help  of  Nishek  Lagn  effects,  like  longevity,  death  etc.  of  the  parents. 

Ch.  5.  Special  Lagnas 

1.  Oh  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  I  explain  below  again  some  special  Lagnas,  viz.  Bhava  Lagn, 
Hora  Lagn  and  Ghati  Lagn. 


2-3.  Bhava  Lagn.  From  sunrise  to  the  time  of  birth  every  5  Ghatis  (or  120  minutes)  constitute 
one  Bhava  Lagn.  Divide  the  time  of  birth  (in  Ghatis,  Vighatis  etc.)  from  sunrise  by  5  and  add 
the  quotient  etc.  to  Surya's  longitude,  as  at  sunrise.  This  is  called  Bhava  Lagn. 

4-5.  Hora  Lagn.  Again  from  sunrise  till  the  time  of  birth  Hora  Lagn  repeats  itself  every  2Vi 
Ghatis  (i.  e.  60  minutes).  Divide  the  time  past  up  to  birth  from  sunrise  by  2Vi  and  add  the 
quotient  etc.  in  Rasis,  degrees  and  so  on  to  the  longitude  of  Surya,  as  at  the  sunrise.  This  will 
yield  Hora  Lagn  in  Rasi,  degrees  etc. 

6-8.  Ghati  Lagn  (Ghatik  Lagn).  Now  listen  to  the  method  of  working  out  Ghati  Lagn.  This 
Lagn  changes  along  with  every  Ghati  (24  minutes)  from  the  sunrise.  Note  birth  time  in  Ghatis 
and  Vighatis.  Consider  the  number  of  Ghatis  past,  as  number  of  Rasis,  or  Ghati  Lagnas.  The 
Vighatis  be  divided  by  2  to  arrive  at  degrees  and  minutes  of  arc,  past  in  the  said  Ghati  Lagn. 
The  product  so  arrived  in  Rasis,  degrees  and  minutes  be  added  to  Surya's  longitude,  as  at 
sunrise,  to  get  the  exact  location  of  Ghati  Lagn.  So  say  Maharishis,  like  Narada. 

9.  Use  of  Special  Lagnas.  Keeping  the  Grahas  at  birth,  as  it  is,  prepare  various  Bhava 
Kundalis  with  respect  to  each  special  Lagn  and  analyze,  as  done  for  the  natal  Lagn. 

10-13V2.  Varnad  Dasha.  I  now  detail  Varnad  Dasha,  just  by  knowing  which  one  can  deal  with 
the  longevity  of  a  native.  If  the  natal  Lagn  is  an  odd  Rasi,  count  directly  from  Mesh  to  natal 
Lagn.  If  the  natal  Lagn  is  an  even  Rasi,  count  from  Meen  to  the  natal  Lagn  in  the  reverse 
order.  Similarly,  if  the  Hora  Lagn  is  an  odd  one,  count  from  Mesh  to  Hora  Lagn  in  direct 
order.  If  the  Hora  Lagn  is  an  even  one,  count  from  Meen  to  Hora  Lagn  in  the  reverse  order.  If 
both  the  products  are  odd  Rasis,  or  even  Rasis,  then  add  both  the  figures.  If  one  is  odd  and  the 
other  is  even,  then  know  the  difference  between  the  two  products.  If  the  latest  product  in  this 
process  is  an  odd  one,  count  so  many  Rasis  from  Mesh  in  a  direct  manner;  if  an  even  one, 
count  so  many  Rasis  from  Meen  in  reverse  order.  The  Rasi  so  known  will  be  the  Varnad  for 
Lagn. 

14-15.  Effects  of  Varnad.  Now  listen  to  the  use  of  the  above.  Out  of  the  two,  viz.  natal  Lagn 
and  Hora  Lagn,  whichever  is  stronger,  from  there  Varnad  starts.  If  the  natal  Lagn  is  an  odd 
Rasi,  the  counting  of  Dashas  is  clockwise,  otherwise  anticlockwise.  Lagn  Dasha  years  will 
equal  the  number  of  Rasis,  intervening  between  the  natal  Lagn  and  Varnad.  Similarly  for 
other  Bhavas. 

16-20.  Effects  of  Varnad  (cont).  Should  a  Kon  from  Lagn's  Varnad  be  occupied,  or  drishtied 
by  a  malefic,  the  native  will  live  only  up  to  the  Dasha  of  the  said  Rasi.  Just,  as  the  Rudra  Grah 
in  Sool  Dasha  is  capable  of  causing  evils,  the  above-mentioned  Grahas  related  to  Varnad' s 
Kon  be  treated.  The  Varnad  Lagn  be  considered,  as  natal  Lagn,  while  the  7th  from  Varnad  will 
denote  the  longevity  of  the  spouse,  the  1 1th  longevity  of  elder  brothers  and  sisters,  the  3rd 
longevity  of  younger  brothers  and  sisters,  the  5th  the  longevity  of  sons,  the  4th  longevity  of 
mother  and  the  9th  longevity  of  father.  The  Dasha  of  the  Sool  Rasi  will  inflict  greater  evils. 

21-24.  Effects  of  Varnad  (cont.).  Similar  assessments  be  made  with  reference  to  the  Varnad  of 
each  Bhava,  commencing  the  first,  and  the  evils  and  goods  due  to  a  nativity  be  known.  These 
Varnad  Dashas  are  only  for  Bhavas  (Rasis)  and  not  their  occupants.  The  sub  period  of  each 
Dasha  will  be  one  twelfth  of  the  Dasha  and  the  order  will  also  be  clockwise,  or  anti- 
clockwise, as  explained  earlier.  The  natal  Lagn  is  to  be  calculated  according  to  birth  place, 
while  Bhava  Lagn,  Hora  Lagn  etc.  are  common  to  all  places. 


Ch.  6.  The  Sixteen  Divisions  of  a  Rasi 

1.  O  Maharishi  Parasar,  I  have  known  from  you  about  the  Grahas,  Rasis  and  their 
descriptions.  I  desire  to  know  the  details  of  various  divisions  of  a  Rasi,  will  you  please 
narrate. 

2-4.  Names  of  the  16  Vargas.  Lord  Brahma  has  described  16  kinds  of  Vargas  (Divisions)  for 
each  Rasi.  Listen  to  those.  The  names  are  Rasi,  Hora,  Dreshkan,  Chaturthahs,  Saptahs, 
Navahs,  Dashahs,  Dvadashahs,  Shodashahs,  Vimshahs,  Chaturvimshahs,  Saptavimshahs, 
Trimshahs,  Khavedahs,  Akshavedahs  and  Shashtiahs. 

5-6.  Rasi  and  Hora.  The  Rasi,  owned  by  a  Grah,  is  called  its  Kshetra.  The  first  half  of  an  odd 
Rasi  is  the  Hora,  ruled  by  Surya.  While  the  second  half  is  the  Hora  of  Candr.  The  reverse  is 
true  in  the  case  of  an  even  Rasi.  Half  of  a  Rasi  is  called  Hora.  These  are  totally  24,  counted 
from  Mesh  and  repeated  twice  (at  the  rate  of  12)  in  the  whole  of  the  zodiac. 


7-8.  Dreshkan.  One  third  of  a  Rasi  is  called  Dreshkan.  These  are  totally  36,  counted  from 
Mesh,  repeating  thrice  at  the  rate  of  12  per  round.  The  1st,  5th  and  the  9th  Rasis  from  a  Rasi 
its  three  Dreshkanas  and  are,  respectively,  lorded  by  Narada,  Agasthya  and  Durvash. 


9.  Chaturthahs.  The  Lords  of  the  4  Kendras  from  a  Rasi  are  the  rulers  of  respective 
Chaturthahs  of  a  Rasi,  commencing  from  Mesh.  Each  Chaturthahs  is  one  fourth  of  a  Rasi.  The 
deities,  respectively,  are  Sanak,  Sanand,  Kumar  and  Sanatan. 

10-11.  Saptahs.  The  Saptahs  (one  seventh  of  a  Rasi)  counting  commences  from  the  same  Rasi 
in  the  case  of  an  odd  Rasi.  It  is  from  the  seventh  Rasi  thereof,  while  an  even  Rasi  is 
considered.  The  names  of  the  seven  divisions  in  odd  Rasis  are  Kshaar  Ksheer,  Dadhi,  Ghrith, 
Ikshu,  Ras,  Madhya  and  Suddh  Jal.  These  designations  are  reversed  for  an  even  Rasi. 

12.  Navahs.  The  Navahs  calculation  are  for  a  Movable  Rasi  from  there  itself,  for  a  Fixed  Rasi 
from  the  9th  thereof  and  for  a  Dual  Rasi  from  the  5th  thereof.  They  go  by  designations  Deva 
(divine),  Manushya  (human)  and  Rakshasa  (devilish)  in  a  successive  and  repetitive  order  for  a 
Movable  Rasi.  (Manushya,  Rakshasa  and  Deva  are  the  order  for  a  Fixed  Rasi,  while 
Rakshasa,  Manushya  and  Deva  are  a  Dual  Rasi's  order) 

13-14.  Dashahs.  Starting  from  the  same  Rasi  for  an  odd  Rasi  and  from  the  9th  with  reference 
to  an  even  Rasi,  the  10  Dashahsas,  each  of  3  degrees,  are  reckoned.  These  are  presided  over 
by  the  ten  rulers  of  the  cardinal  directions,  viz.  Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  Rakshasa,  Varuna,  Vayu, 
Kuber,  Isan,  Brahma  and  Ananth  in  case  of  an  odd  Rasi.  It  is  in  the  reverse  order,  that  these 
presiding  deities  are  reckoned,  when  an  even  Rasi  is  given. 

15.  Dvadashahs.  The  reckoning  of  the  Dvadashahs  (one  twelfth  of  a  Rasi,  or  2V2  degrees  each) 
commences  from  the  same  Rasi.  In  each  Rasi  the  presidentship  repeats  thrice  in  the  order  of 
Ganesh,  Ashvini  Kumar,  Yama  and  Sarpa  for  the  12  Dvadashahsas. 

16.  Shodashahs  (or  Kalahs).  Starting  from  Mesh  for  a  Movable  Rasi,  from  Simh  for  a  Fixed 
Rasi  and  from  Dhanu  for  a  Dual  Rasi,  the  16  Shodashahsas  (16th  part  of  a  Rasi,  i.e.  of 
1°52'30")  are  regularly  distributed.  The  presiding  deities  of  these  repeat  in  the  order  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Shiva  and  Surya  four  times  in  the  case  of  an  odd  Rasi.  It  is  reverse  in  the  case  of  an 
even  Rasi,  that  these  ruling  deities  are  understood. 


17-21.  Vimshans.  From  Mesh  for  a  Movable  Rasi,  from  Dhanu  for  a  Fixed  Rasi  and  from 
Simh  for  a  Common  Rasi:  this  is  how  the  calculations  of  Vimshahsas  (l/20th  of  a  Rasi,  or 
1°30'  each)  are  to  commence.  The  presiding  deities  of  the  20  Vimshahsas  in  an  odd  Rasi  are, 
respectively:  Kali,  Gauri,  Jaya,  Lakshmi,  Vijaya,  Vimal,  Sati,  Tara,  Jvalamukhi,  Sveta,  Lalita, 
Bagalamukhi,  Pratyangir,  Shachi,  Raudri,  Bhavani,  Varad,  Jaya,  Tripura  and  Sumukhi.  In  an 
even  Rasi  these  20  deities,  respectively,  are  Daya,  Megha,  Chinnasi,  Pisachini,  Dhumavathi, 
Matangi,  Bal,  Bhadr,  Arun,  Anal,  Pingal,  Chuchchuk,  Ghora,  Vaarahi,  Vaishnavi,  Sita, 
Bhuvanesvari,  Bhairavi,  Mangal  and  Aparajit. 

22-23.  Chaturvimshahs.  The  Chaturvimshahs  (l/24th  part  of  a  Rasi,  or  1°15'  each)  distribution 
commences  from  Simh  and  Kark,  respectively,  for  an  odd  and  an  even  Rasi.  In  the  case  of  an 
odd  Rasi  the  ruling  deities  repeat  twice  in  the  order  of  Skand,  Parusdhar,  Anal,  Vishwakarma, 
Bhag,  Mitr,  Maya,  Antaka,  Vrisha-Dwaja,  Govinda,  Madan  and  Bhima.  Reverse  these  from 
Bhima  twice  to  know  the  deities  for  the  Chaturvimshahs  in  an  even  Rasi. 

24-26.  Saptavimshahs  (Nakshatrahs,  or  Bhahs).  The  Saptavimshahs  Lords  are,  respectively, 
the  presiding  deities  of  the  27  Nakshatras,  as  under:  Dastra  (Ashvini  Kumar),  Yama,  Agni, 
Brahma,  Candr,  Isa,  Adhiti,  Jiva,  Ahi,  Pitar,  Bhag,  Aryama,  Surya,  Tvasht,  Marut,  Chakragni, 
Mitr,  Vasava,  Rakshasa,  Varuna,  Vishwadeva,  Govinda,  Vasu,  Varuna,  Ajap,  Ahirbuddhnya 
and  Pushya.  These  are  for  an  odd  Rasis.  Count  these  deities  in  a  reverse  order  for  an  even 
Rasi.  The  Saptavimshahs  distribution  commences  from  Mesh  and  other  Movable  Rasis  for  all 
the  12  Rasis. 

27-28.  Trimshahs.  The  Trimshahs  Lords  for  an  odd  Rasi  are  Mangal,  Sani,  Guru,  Budh  and 
Sukr.  Each  of  them  in  order  rules  5,  5,  8,  7  and  5  degrees.  The  deities,  ruling  over  the 
Trimshahsas,  are,  respectively,  Agni,  Vayu,  Indra,  Kuber  and  Varuna.  In  the  case  of  an  even 
Rasi  the  quantum  of  Trimshahs,  Grah  lordship  and  deities  get  reversed. 

29-30.  Khavedahs  (or  Chatvarimshahs,  l/40th  part  of  a  Rasi).  For  odd  Rasis  count  from  Mesh 
and  for  an  even  Rasi  from  Tula  in  respect  of  Khavedahsas  (each  of  45'  of  arc).  Vishnu,  Candr, 
Marichi,  Tvasht,  Dhata,  Shiva,  Ravi,  Yama,  Yaksh,  Gandharv,  Kaal  and  Varuna  repeat 
successively,  as  presiding  deities,  in  the  same  order  for  all  Rasis. 

31-32.  Akshavedahs  (l/45th  part  of  a  Rasi).  Mesh,  Simh  and  Dhanu  are  the  Rasis,  from  which 
the  distributions,  respectively,  commence  for  Movable,  Immovable  and  Common  Rasis.  In 
Movable  Rasis  Brahma,  Shiva  and  Vishnu;  in  Immovable  Rasis  Shiva,  Vishnu  and  Brahma 
and  in  Common  Rasis  Vishnu,  Brahma  and  Shiva  repeat  15  times  the  presidentship  over  these 
Akshavedahsas. 

33-41.  Shashtiahs  (l/60th  part  of  a  Rasi,  or  half  a  degree  each).  To  calculate  the  Shashtiahs 
Lord  ignore  the  Rasi  position  of  a  Grah  and  take  the  degrees  etc.  it  traversed  in  that  Rasi. 
Multiply  that  figure  by  2  and  divide  the  degrees  by  12.  Add  1  to  the  remainder,  which  will 
indicate  the  Rasi,  in  which  the  Shashtiahs  falls.  The  Lord  of  that  Rasi  is  the  Grah,  ruling  the 
said  Shashtiahs.  In  odd  Rasis  the  names  of  Shashtiahsas  are  1.  Ghora,  2.  Rakshasa,  3.  Deva,  4. 
Kuber,  5.  Yaksh,  6.  Kindar,  7.  Bhrasht,  8.  Kulaghna,  9.  Garal,  10.  Vahni,  11.  Maya,  12. 
Purishak,  13.  Apampathi,  14.  Marutwan,  15.  Kaal,  16.  Sarpa,  17.  Amrit,  18.  Indu,  19.  Mridu, 
20.  Komal,  21.  Heramba,  22.  Brahma,  23.  Vishnu,  24.  Maheshwara,  25.  Deva,  26.  Ardr,  27. 
Kalinas,  28.  Kshitees,  29.  Kamalakar,  30.  Gulik,  31.  Mrityu,  32.  Kaal,  33.  Davagni,  34. 
Ghora,  35.  Yama,  36  Kantak,  37.  Suddh,  38.  Amrit,  39.  PurnaCandr,  40.  Vishadagdha,  41. 
Kulanas,  42.  Vamshakshaya,  43.  Utpat,  44.  Kaal,  45.  Saumya,  46.  Komal,  47.  Sheetal,  48. 


Karaladamshtr,  49.  Candramukhi,  50.  Praveen,  51.  Kaalpavak,  52.  Dhannayudh,  53.  Nirmal, 
54.  Saumya,  55.  Krur,  56.  Atisheetal,  57.  Amrit,  58.  Payodhi,  59.  Brahman,  60.  CandraRekha 
(InduRekha).  The  reverse  is  the  order  for  even  Rasis  in  so  much,  as  these  names  are  cased. 
Grahas  in  benefic  Shashtiahsas  produce  auspicious,  while  the  opposite  is  true  in  case  of 
Grahas  in  malefic  Shashtiahsas. 

42-53.  Varg  Classification.  Maitreya,  explained  now  are  the  sum  effects  of  classifications  of 
different  divisions  (or  Vargas,  so  far  narrated).  These  are  four  kinds,  viz.  Shad  Varg,  Sapth 
Varg,  Dasha  Varg  and  Shodasha  Varg.  In  the  ShadVarg  classification  the  Varg  designations 
are  Kimshuk,  Vyanjan,  Chamar,  Chatr  and  Kundal,  according  to  a  Grah  being  in  2  to  6 
combinations  of  good  Vargas.  Next  is  the  Sapth  Varg,  in  which  these  classifications  continue 
in  the  same  manner  up  to  six  combinations  of  good  Vargas,  the  7th  additional  Varg  getting 
classified,  as  Mukut.  In  the  Dasha  Varg  scheme  the  designations  commence  from  Parijata  etc., 
such  as  2  good  Vargas  -  Parijatha,  3  Uttama,  4  Gopur,  5  Simhasan,  6  Paravata,  7  Devaloka,  8 
Brahmaloka,  9  Sakravahana  and  10  Vargas  -  Shridham.  In  the  Shodasha  Varg  scheme  the 
combinations  of  Vargas  go  with  designations  thus:  two  good  Vargas  -  Bhedak,  3  Kusum,  4 
Nagapushpa,  5  Kanduk,  6  Kerala,  7  Kalpa  Vriksha,  8  Chandan  Vana,  9  PurnaCandr,  10 
Uchchaisrava,  11  Dhanvantari,  12  Suryakant,  13  Vidrum,  14  Chakra- Simhasan,  15  Golok  and 
16  Vargas  -  Sri  Vallabh.  In  these  divisions  the  divisions,  falling  in  the  Grah's  exaltation  Rasi, 
Mooltrikon  Rasi,  own  Rasi  and  the  Rasis,  owned  by  the  Lord  of  a  Kendra  from  the  Arudha 
Lagn,  are  all  to  be  considered  (as  good  Vargas).  The  divisions  of  a  combust  Grah,  defeated 
Grah,  weak  Grah  and  a  Grah  in  bad  Avasthas,  like  Sayan,  be  all  ignored  to  be  auspicious,  for 
these  destroy  the  good  Yogas. 

Ch.  7.  Divisional  Considerations 

1-8.  Use  of  the  16  Divisions.  Now  I  will  explain  the  use  of  these  sixteen  divisions.  The 
physique  from  Lagn,  wealth  from  Hora,  happiness  through  co-born  from  Dreshkan,  fortunes 
from  Chaturthahs,  sons  and  grandsons  from  Saptahs,  spouse  from  Navahs,  power  (and 
position)  from  Dashahs,  parents  from  Dvadashahs,  benefits  and  adversities  through 
conveyances  from  Shodashahs,  worship  from  Vimshahs,  learning  from  Chaturvimshahs, 
strength  and  weakness  from  Saptavimshahs,  evil  effects  from  Trimshahs,  auspicious  and 
inauspicious  effects  from  Khavedahs  and  all  indications  from  both  Akshavedahs  and 
Shashtiahs:  these  are  the  considerations  to  be  made  through  the  respective  Vargas.  The  Bhava, 
whose  Lord  is  in  a  malefic  Shashtiahs,  will  diminish;  so  say  Garga  and  others.  The  Bhava, 
whose  Lord  is  in  a  benefic  Shodashahs,  flourish.  This  is  how  the  16  Vargas  are  to  be 
evaluated. 

9-12.  After  assessing  the  20  point  strength  of  the  ascending  degree,  of  other  Bhavas  and  of  the 
Grahas,  the  good  and  bad  effects  be  declared.  I  explain  below  the  method  of  knowing  the 
Vimsopak  strength  (20  point  strength),  just  by  knowing  which  an  idea  of  the  results  of  actions 
of  this  birth  and  of  former  birth  will  clearly  emerge.  The  Grahas  from  Surya  on  get  full 
strength,  when  in  exaltation,  or  in  own  Rasi  and  are  bereft  of  strength,  when  in  the  7th  (from 
exaltation).  In  between  the  strength  be  known  by  the  rule  of  three  process.  In  the  case  of  a 
Grah,  owning  two  Rasis,  distinction  of  placement  in  odd/even  Rasi  identical  with  own  Rasi  be 
made. 

13-16.  Hora,  Dreshkan  and  Trimshahs  Effects.  Guru,  Surya  and  Mangal  give  (pronounced) 
effects  in  the  Hora  of  Surya.  Candr,  Sukr  and  Sani  do  so,  when  in  Candr's  Horas;  Budh  is 
effective  in  both  the  Horas.  In  the  case  of  an  even  Rasi  the  Hora  of  Candr  will  be  powerful  in 


effects,  while  Surya's  Hora  in  an  odd  Rasi  will  be  so.  Full,  medium  and  nil  will  be  the  effects, 
respectively,  in  the  beginning  middle  and  the  end  of  a  Hora.  Similar  applications  be  made  for 
a  Dreshkan,  Turyahs,  Navahs  etc.  As  for  Trimshahs  effects,  Surya  is  akin  to  Mangal  and 
Candr  is  akin  to  Sukr.  The  effects,  applicable  to  Rasi,  will  apply  to  Trimshahs. 

17-19.  VimshopakBal.  The  Shad  Vargas  consist  of  Rasi,  Hora,  Dreshkan,  Navahs, 
Dvadashahs  and  Trimshahs.  The  full  Bal  for  each  of  the  divisions,  respectively,  are  6,  2,  4,  5, 
2  and  1.  This  is  the  Vimshopak  Bal,  relating  to  Shad  Varg  division.  Adding  the  Saptahs  to  the 
Shad  Vargas,  we  get  Sapt  Varg,  the  Vimshopak  Bal  for  which  is  5,  2,  3,  2V2,  4lA,  2  and  1. 
These  are  gross  strengths,  while  subtle  ones  should  be  understood  by  exact  positions. 

20.  Add  Dashahs,  Shodashahs  and  Shashtiahs  to  the  said  Sapt  Varg  Divisions  to  get  the 
scheme  of  Dasha  Varg.  The  Vimshopak  Bal  in  this  context  is  3  for  Rasi,  5  for  Shashtiahs  and 
for  the  other  8  divisions  VA  each. 

21-25.  When  the  16  divisions  (Shodash  Varg  Scheme)  are  considered  together,  the 
Vimshopak  score  goes  thus:  Hora  1,  Trimsahs  1,  Dreshkan  1,  Shodashahs  2,  Navahs  3,  Rasi 
3V2,  Shashtiahs  4  and  the  rest  of  the  nine  divisions  each  a  half.  The  Vimshopak  Bal  remains  as 
20,  only  when  the  Grah  is  in  own  Bhava  Vargas.  Otherwise,  the  total  strength  from  20 
declines  to  18  in  Pramudit  Vargas,  to  15  in  Shant  Vargas,  to  10  in  Svasth  divisions,  to  7  in 
Duhkhit  Vargas  and  to  5  in  Khal  Vargas.  (These  figures  are  called  Varg  Vishwa) 

26-27.  Vimshopak  Proportional  Evaluation.  Multiply  the  figure  due  to  full  strength  for  the 
division  by  the  Varg  Vishwa  and  divide  by  20  to  get  the  exact  strength  of  the  Grah.  If  the  total 
is  below  5,  the  Grah  will  not  be  capable  of  giving  auspicious  results.  If  it  is  above  5,  but 
below  10,  the  Grah  will  yield  some  good  effects.  Later  on  up  to  15  it  is  indicative  of  mediocre 
effect.  A  Grah  with  above  15  will  yield  wholly  favourable  effects. 

28-29.  Other  Sources  of  Strength.  Maitreya,  there  are  other  kinds  of  sources,  as  I  explain 
below.  Grahas  in  the  7th  from  Surya  will  be  fully  effective.  One  with  an  identical  longitude  in 
comparison  to  Surya's  will  destroy  the  good  effects.  Rule  of  three  process  be  applied  to  the 
Grah  in  between  these  positions. 

30-32.  Dasha  effects  with  Vimshopak  Bal.  Maitreya,  after  assessing  the  Vimshopak  Bal 
through  the  various  divisions,  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  Grahas  be  considered.  The 
Vimshopak  Bal  is  classified  under  Purna,  AtiPurna,  Madhya,  AtiMadhya,  Heen,  AtiHeen, 
Swalpa  and  AtiSwalp.  Thus  should  be  classified  the  Vimshopak  Bal  and  the  Dasha  period 
results  declared  accordingly. 

33-36.  Kendras,  Konas  etc.  defined.  O  Maitreya,  listen  to  other  matters,  which  I  am 
explaining.  The  Kendras  are  specially  known,  as  Lagn  (the  ascendent),  Bandhu  Bhava,  Yuvati 
Bhava  (the  descendant)  and  Karm  Bhava  (mid-heaven).  Dhan,  Putr,  Randhr  and  Labh  Bhava 
are  Panapharas  (succedents),  while  Sahaj,  Ari,  Dharm  and  Vyaya  Bhava  are  called  Apoklimas 
(cadents).  Putr  and  Dharm  Bhava  are  known  by  the  name  Kon  (or  trine).  Evil  Bhavas,  or 
Dusthan  Bhavas  are  Ari,  Randhr  and  Vyaya  Bhava.  Chaturasras  are  Bandhu  and  Randhr 
Bhava.  Sahaj,  Ari,  Karm  and  Labh  Bhava  are  Upachaya  Bhavas. 

37-38.  Names  of  Bhavas.  Thanu,  Dhan,  Sahaj,  Bandhu,  Putr,  Ari,  Yuvati,  Randhr,  Dharm, 
Karma,  Labh  and  Vyaya  are  in  order  the  names  of  Bhavas.  I  explained  these  briefly  and  leave 


it  to  you  to  grasp  more,  according  to  your  intelligence.  As  delivered  by  Lord  Brahma,  some 
further  information  is  added  thus  (i.e.  in  the  following  verses). 

39-43.  Indications  from  Bhavas.  Dharm  Bhava  and  the  9th  from  Surya  deal  with  one's  father. 
Whatever  effects  are  to  be  known  from  the  Karm  and  Labh  Bhava,  be  also  known  from 
similar  Bhavas,  counted  from  Surya.  Whatever  results  are  to  be  known  from  Bandhu,  Tanu, 
Dhan,  Labh  and  Dharm  should  also  be  known  from  the  4th  of  Candr,  from  Kark  Rasi  itself  and 
from  the  2nd,  1 1th  and  9th  from  Candr,  respectively.  Whatever  has  to  be  known  through  Sahaj 
Bhava,  be  also  analyzed  through  the  3rd  from  Mangal.  The  6th  from  Budh  be  also  considered 
in  regard  to  indications,  derivable  from  Ari  Bhava.  The  5th  from  Guru,  the  7th  from  Sukr  and 
both  the  8th  and  12th  from  Sani  stand  for  consideration,  respectively,  in  respect  of  offspring, 
spouse  and  death.  The  Lord  of  the  Bhava  is  equally  important,  when  estimating  the 
indications  of  a  particular  Bhava. 

Ch.  8.  Drishtis  of  the  Rasis 

1-3.  Rasi  Drishtis.  O  Maitreya,  now  detailed  are  the  Drishtis,  emanating  from  the  Rasi  Mesh 
etc.  Every  Movable  Rasi  drishties  the  3  Fixed  Rasis,  leaving  the  Fixed  Rasi  adjacent  to  it. 
Every  Fixed  Rasi  gives  Drishti  to  the  3  Movable  Rasis,  barring  the  adjacent  Movable  Rasi. 
And  a  Common  Rasi  gives  a  Drishti  to  the  other  three  Common  Rasis.  The  Grah  in  a  Rasi 
gives  the  same  Drishti,  as  the  Rasi  (in  which  the  Grah  is)  does. 

4-5.  Dristhis  of  the  Grahas.  A  Grah  in  a  Movable  Rasi  gives  a  Drishti  to  the  other  3  Fixed 
Rasis,  leaving  the  Fixed  Rasi  next  to  it.  A  Grah  in  a  Fixed  Rasi  does  not  give  a  Drishti  to  the 
next  Movable  Rasi,  but  the  remaining  3  Movable  Rasis.  The  one  in  a  Common  Rasi  gives  a 
Drishti  to  the  remaining  3  Common  Rasis.  Simultaneously  a  Grah  in  the  Rasi,  that  receives  a 
Drishti,  is  also  subjected  to  the  Drishti  concerned. 

6-9.  Diagram  of  Dristhis.  As  depicted  by  Lord  Brahma,  I  now  narrate  the  diagram  of  Drishtis, 
so  that  Drishtis  are  easily  understood  by  a  mere  sight  of  the  diagram.  Draw  a  square,  or  a 
circle  marking  the  8  directions  (4  corners  and  4  quarters  thereof).  Mark  the  zodiacal  Rasis,  as 
under:  Mesh  and  Vrishabh  in  East,  Mithun  in  the  North-East,  Kark  and  Simh  in  the  North, 
Kanya  in  the  North-West,  Tula  and  Vrischik  in  the  West,  Dhanu  in  the  South-West,  Makar 
and  Kumbh  in  the  South  and  Meen  in  the  South-East. 

Addition  Santhanam  till  Ch.  9.  The  Drishtis  (as  per  the  earlier  Slokas)  can  be  shown  in  a 
square  diagram,  or  circular  diagram  (as  per  convenience). 

Ch.  9.  Evils  at  Birth 

1.  O  Brahmin,  first  of  all  estimate  the  evils  and  checking  factors  thereof  through  Lagn  and 
then  declare  the  effects  of  the  12  Bhavas. 

2.  Evils,  causing  premature  end,  exist  up  to  the  24th  year  of  one's  age.  As  such,  no  definite 
calculation  of  life  span  should  be  made  till  such  year  of  age. 

3-6.  Short-life  Combinations  (up  to  Sloka  23).  Should  Candr  be  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya 
Bhava  and  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  the  child  will  die  soon.  If  in  the  process  there  be 
a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  it  may  live  up  to  8.  If  a  benefic  is  retrograde  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or 


Vyaya  Bhava,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  death  will  occur  within  a  month  of  birth. 
This  is  true,  only  when  Lagn  is  not  occupied  by  a  benefic.  Should  Putr  Bhava  be  occupied  by 
Sani,  Mangal  and  Surya  jointly,  (early)  death  of  mother  and  brother  will  come  to  pass. 
Mangal,  placed  in  Tanu,  or  in  Randhr  Bhava  and  be  yuti  with  Sani,  or  Surya,  or  receiving  a 
Drishti  from  a  malefic,  being  bereft  of  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  will  prove  a  source  of 
(immediate)  death. 

7-1 1 .  If  Sani  and  Mangal  give  a  Drishti  to  Lagn,  as  the  luminaries  are  yuti  with  Rahu 
(elsewhere),  the  child  will  live  a  fortnight.  Immediate  death  of  the  child  along  with  its  mother 
will  occur,  if  Sani  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  Candr  in  Ari  Bhava  and  Mangal  in  Yuvati  Bhava.  One 
will  immediately  go  to  the  abode  of  Yama,  if  Sani  is  in  Tanu  Bhava,  while  Candr  and  Guru 
are  in  their  order  in  Randhr  and  Sahaj  Bhava.  Only  a  month  will  be  the  span  of  one's  life,  who 
had  Surya  in  Dharm  Bhava,  Mangal  in  Yuvati  Bhava  and  Guru  and  Sukr  in  Labh  Bhava.  All 
Grahas  (any  Grah)  in  Vyaya  Bhava  will  be  the  source  of  a  short  life,  specifically  the 
luminaries,  Sukr  and  Rahu.  But  the  Drishti  of  these  four  Grahas  (on  Vyaya  Bhava)  will 
counteract  such  evils. 

12.  Candr  is  capable  of  causing  early  end,  if  she  is  with  a  malefic  in  Yuvati,  Randhr,  or  Tanu 
Bhava  and  unrelated  to  a  benefic. 

13.  Early  death  will  come  to  pass,  if  there  be  a  birth  in  the  morning,  or  evening  junctions,  or 
in  a  Hora,  ruled  by  Candr,  or  in  Gandanta,  while  Candr  and  malefics  occupy  Kendras  from 
Lagn. 

14.  Definition  of  Sandhya.  3  Ghatis  before  the  sight  of  the  semi  disc  (half)  of  the  rising  Surya 
and  a  similar  duration,  following  Surya' s  set,  are  called,  as  morning  twilight  and  evening 
twilight,  respectively. 

15.  Early  Death.  Should  all  the  malefics  be  in  the  oriental  half,  while  benefics  are  in  the 
occidental  half,  early  death  of  one  born  in  Vrischik,  will  follow.  In  this  case  there  is  no  need 
of  any  rethinking. 

16.  Malefic  in  Vyaya  and  Ari  Bhava,  or  in  Randhr  and  Dhan  Bhava,  while  Lagn  is  hemmed 
between  other  malefics,  will  bring  early  death. 

17.  Malefics,  occupying  Tanu  and  Yuvati  Bhava,  while  Candr  is  yuti  with  a  malefic  with  no 
relief  from  a  benefic,  will  also  cause  premature  death. 

18.  Early  death  will  be  inflicted  on  the  native,  if  decreasing  Candr  is  in  Tanu  Bhava,  while 
malefics  capture  Randhr  Bhava  and  a  Kendra.  There  is  no  doubt  about  that. 

19.  Candr  in  Tanu,  Randhr,  Vyaya,  or  Yuvati  Bhava  and  hemmed  between  malefics  will 
confer  premature  death. 

20.  Should  Candr  be  in  Tanu  Bhava,  hemmed  between  malefics,  while  Yuvati,  or  Randhr 
Bhava  has  a  malefic  in  it,  he  will  face  immediate  death  along  with  his  mother. 

21.  Should  Sani,  Surya  and  Mangal  be  in  Vyaya,  Dharm  and  Randhr  Bhava  without  Drishti 
from  a  benefic,  the  child  will  face  instant  death. 


22.  With  a  malefic  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  or  in  the  rising  Dreshkan,  while  decreasing  Candr  is  in 
Tanu  Bhava,  death  be  experienced  early. 

23.  The  life  span  of  the  child  will  be  either  2  months,  or  6  months  only,  if  all  Grahas  devoid  of 
strength  are  relegated  to  Apoklima  Bhavas. 

24.  Evils  to  Mother  (up  to  Sloka  33).  The  mother  of  the  native  will  incur  evils  (will  die  soon), 
if  Candr  at  birth  receives  a  Drishti  from  three  malefics.  Benefics,  giving  a  Drishti  to  Candr, 
will  bring  good  to  the  mother. 

25.  Should  Dhan  Bhava  be  occupied  by  Rahu,  Budh,  Sukr,  Surya  and  Sani,  the  child's  birth 
has  been  after  its  father's  death,  while  even  the  mother  will  face  early  death. 

26.  If  Candr  is  in  the  7th,  or  the  8th  from  a  malefic,  be  herself  with  a  malefic  and  receives  a 
Drishti  from  a  strong  malefic,  predict  mothers  end  to  be  early. 

27.  The  child  will  not  live  on  mother's  milk,  but  on  that  of  she-goat,  if  Surya  is  exalted,  or 
debilitated  in  Yuvati  Bhava. 

28.  Should  a  malefic  be  in  the  4th,  identical  with  an  inimical  Rasi,  counted  from  Candr,  while 
there  is  no  benefic  in  a  Kendra,  the  child  will  lose  its  mother  in  a  premature  manner. 

29.  Malefics  in  Ari  and  Vyaya  Bhava  will  bring  evils  to  mother.  The  child's  father  will 
receive  similar  effects,  if  Bandhu  and  Karm  Bhava  are  captured  by  malefics. 

30.  Budh  in  Dhan  Bhava,  while  malefics  occupy  Tanu  and  Vyaya  Bhava:  this  Yoga  will 
destroy  the  entire  family. 

3 1 .  Guru,  Sani  and  Rahu,  respectively,  posited  in  Tanu,  Dhan  and  Sahaj  Bhava  will  cause 
mother's  death  early. 

32.  Doubtlessly  the  mother  will  give  up  the  child,  if  it  has  malefics  in  Konas,  counted  from 
the  decreasing  Candr.  No  benefic  shall  be  yuti  with  the  said  malefics. 

33.  If  Mangal  and  Sani  are  together  in  a  Kendra  with  reference  to  Candr  and  occupy  one  and 
the  same  Navahs,  the  child  will  have  two  mothers.  Yet  it  will  be  short-lived. 

34.  Evil  to  Father  (up  to  Sloka  42).  One's  father  will  incur  early  death,  if  Sani,  Mangal  and 
Candr  in  their  orders  are  in  Tanu,  Yuvati  and  Ari  Bhava. 

35.  The  native  will  at  the  time  of  his  marriage  lose  his  father,  if  Guru  is  in  Tanu  Bhava,  while 
Sani,  Surya,  Mangal  and  Budh  are  together  in  Dhan  Bhava. 

36.  Early  loss  of  father  will  take  place,  if  Surya  is  with  a  malefic,  or  is  hemmed  between 
malefics,  as  there  is  another  malefic  in  the  7th  from  Surya. 

37.  Remote  will  be  the  possibility  of  one's  father  sustaining,  if  Surya  is  in  Yuvati,  while 
Mangal  is  in  Karm  and  Rahu  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava. 


38.  Early  and  troubled  will  be  one's  father's  death,  if  Mangal  is  in  Karrn  Bhava  identical  with 
his  enemy's  Rasi. 

39.  Candr  in  Ari  Bhava,  Sani  in  Tanu  Bhava  and  Mangal  in  Yuvati  Bhava:  this  array  of 
heavenly  bodies  at  birth  will  not  ensure  a  long  span  of  life  for  the  father. 

40.  If  Surya  receives  a  Drishti  from  Sani  and  be  in  Mesh,  or  in  Vrischik  Navahs,  the  father 
would  have  given  up  the  family  before  birth  of  the  child,  or  would  have  passed  away. 

41.  If  Bandhu,  Karm  and  Vyaya  Bhava  are  all  occupied  by  malefics,  both  the  parents  will 
leave  the  child  to  its  own  fate  and  wander  from  place  to  place. 

42.  The  father  will  not  see  the  native  till  his  (the  native's)  23rd  year,  if  Rahu  and  Guru  are 
together  in  an  inimical  Rasi  identical  with  Tanu,  or  Bandhu  Bhava. 

43-45.  Parents.  Surya  is  the  indicator  of  father  for  all  beings,  while  the  mother  is  indicated  by 
Candr.  Should  Surya  receive  a  Drishti  from  one,  or  more  malefics,  or  be  hemmed  between 
them,  this  will  cause  evils  to  father.  Similarly  Candr  be  considered  in  respect  of  mother. 
Malefics  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  4th  from  Surya  will  bring  inauspicious  results  about  the 
father.  Malefics  in  such  places  from  Candr  will  be  adverse  for  the  mother.  The  strength,  or 
otherwise  of  the  occupants  concerned  be  suitably  estimated. 

Ch.  10.  Antidotes  for  Evils 

1.  Those  are  the  evils  (due  to  a  native).  I  now  narrate  the  antidotes  for  such  evils  as  well, 
which  will  be  helpful  to  assess  the  extent  of  inauspiciousness. 

2.  Should  one  among  Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr  be  in  an  angle  from  Lagn,  all  evils  are  destroyed, 
as  Surya  eliminates  darkness. 

3.  Just  as  a  single  reverential  obeisance  before  Lord  Shiva,  the  Trident  holder  frees  one  from 
all  sins,  a  single,  but  strong  Guru  in  Lagn  will  ward  off  all  the  evils. 

4.  Lagn  Lord  is  singly  capable  of  counteracting  all  evils,  if  he  is  strongly  placed  in  an  angle, 
just  as  Lord  Shiva,  the  holder  of  the  Bow  destroyed  the  three  cities,  built  of  gold,  silver  and 
iron  for  the  demons  by  Maya. 

5.  All  evils  are  destroyed,  if  a  benefic  drishties  Lagn  of  one  born  during  the  night  in  the  bright 
half.  Similarly  a  malefic' s  Drishti  on  Lagn  of  one  born  during  day  time  in  the  dark  half. 

6.  Surya  in  Vyaya  will  confer  a  hundred-year  life  span  on  one  born  in  Tul  Lagn. 

7.  It  will  prove  auspicious  for  the  mother  as  well  as  the  native,  if  Mangal  joins,  or  is  drishtied 
by  Guru. 

8.  If  malefics  are  surrounded  by  benefics,  while  angles,  or  trines  are  themselves  benefic- 
occupied,  evils  disappear  soon.  Not  only  this,  evils  will  not  follow  from  the  Bhavas 
concerned. 


Ch.  11.  Judgement  of  Bhavas 


1.  O  Maharishi  Parashar,  I  have  come  to  know  of  the  evils  and  antidotes  thereof  from  you. 
Please  tell  me,  what  is  to  be  deduced  from  each  Bhava. 

2.  Indications  of  Tanu  Bhava.  Maharishi  Parashar  replies.  Physique,  appearance,  intellect  (or 
the  organ  of  intelligence,  i.e.  brain),  complexion  of  the  body,  vigour,  weakness,  happiness, 
grief  and  innate  nature  are  all  to  be  guessed  through  the  ascending  Rasi. 

3.  Indications  of  Dhan  Bhava.  Wealth,  grains  (food  etc.),  family,  death,  enemies,  metals, 
precious  stones  etc.  are  to  be  understood  through  Dhan  Bhava. 

4.  Indications  of  Sahaj  Bhava.  From  Sahaj  Bhava  know  of  the  following:  valour,  servants 
(attending  etc.),  brothers,  sisters  etc.,  initiatory  instructions  (Upadesh),  journey  and  parent's 
death. 

5.  Indications  of  Bandhu  Bhava.  Conveyances,  relatives,  mother,  happiness,  treasure,  lands 
and  buildings  are  to  be  consulted  through  Bandhu  Bhava. 

6.  Indications  of  Putr  Bhava.  The  learned  should  deduce  from  Putr  Bhava  amulets,  sacred 
spells,  learning,  knowledge,  sons,  royalty  (or  authority),  fall  of  position  etc. 

7.  Indications  of  Ari  Bhava.  Maternal  uncle,  doubts  about  death,  enemies,  ulcers,  step-mother 
etc.  are  to  be  estimated  from  Ari  Bhava. 

8.  Indications  of  Yuvati  Bhava.  Wife,  travel,  trade,  loss  of  sight,  death  etc.  be  known  from 
Yuvati  Bhava. 

9.  Indications  of  Randhr  Bhava.  Randhr  Bhava  indicates  longevity,  battle,  enemies,  forts, 
wealth  of  the  dead  and  things,  that  have  happened  and  are  to  happen  (in  the  past  and  future 
births). 

10.  Indications  of  Dharm  Bhava.  Fortunes,  wife's  brother,  religion,  brother's  wife,  visits  to 
shrines  etc.  be  known  from  Dharm  Bhava. 

11.  Indications  of  Karm  Bhava.  Royalty  (authority),  place,  profession  (livelihood),  honour, 
father,  living  in  foreign  lands  and  debts  are  to  be  understood  from  Karm  Bhava. 

12.  Indications  of  Labh  Bhava.  All  articles,  son's  wife,  income,  prosperity,  quadrupeds  etc. 
are  to  be  understood  from  Labh  Bhava. 

13.  Indications  of  Vyaya  Bhava.  From  Vyaya  Bhava,  one  can  know  about  expenses,  history  of 
enemies,  one's  own  death  etc. 

14-16.  Prosperity,  or  Annihilation  of  a  Bhava.  Predict  prosperity  of  the  Bhava,  which  is  yuti 
with,  or  drishtied  by  a  benefic.  Also,  when  its  Lord  is  in  Yuvavastha,  or  Prabuddhavastha,  or 
in  Kismaravastha,  or  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  Bhavas  well-being  is  indicated.  The  Bhava,  which  is 
not  drishtied  by  its  Lord,  or,  whose  Lord  is  with  a  malefic  Grah,  or  with  one  of  the  Lords  of 
evil  and  such  other  Bhavas  (i.e.  3rd,  6th,  8th,  1 1th  and  12th),  or  is  defeated  in  a  war  between 
Grahas,  or  is  in  one  of  the  three  Avasthas,  viz,  Vriddhavastha,  Mritavastha  and  Suptavastha. 


Ch.  12.  Effects  of  Tanu  Bhava 

1-2.  Physical  comforts.  Should  Lagn  Lord  be  yuti  with  a  malefic,  or  be  in  Randhr,  6th,  or  12th, 
physical  felicity  will  diminish.  If  he  is  in  an  angle,  or  trine  there  will  be  at  all  times  comforts 
of  the  body.  If  Lagn  Lord  is  in  debilitation,  combustion,  or  enemy's  Rasi,  there  will  be 
diseases.  With  a  benefic  in  an  angle,  or  trine  all  diseases  will  disappear.  Lagn's  angles  (i.e. 
Bandhu,  Yuvati,  or  the  10th),  or  its  trine  (Putr,  Dharm),  containing  a  benefic,  is  a  powerful 
remedy  for  all,  related  to  health. 

3.  There  will  not  be  bodily  health,  if  Lagn,  or  Candr  be  drishtied  by,  or  yuti  with  a  malefic, 
being  devoid  of  a  benefics  Drishti. 

4.  Bodily  Beauty.  A  benefic  in  Lagn  will  give  a  pleasing  appearance,  while  a  malefic  will 
make  one  bereft  of  good  appearance.  Felicity  of  the  body  will  be  enjoyed,  if  Lagn  is  drishtied 
by,  or  yuti  with  a  benefic. 

5-7.  Other  Benefits.  If  Lagn  Lord,  Budh,  Guru,  or  Sukr  be  in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine,  the  native 
will  be  long  lived,  wealthy,  intelligent  and  liked  by  the  king.  Fame,  wealth,  abundant 
pleasures  and  comforts  of  the  body  will  be  acquired,  if  Lagn  Lord  is  in  a  Movable  Rasi  and  be 
drishtied  by  a  benefic  Grah.  One  will  be  endowed  with  royal  marks  (of  fortune),  if  Budh, 
Guru,  or  Sukr  be  in  Lagn  along  with  the  Candr,  or  be  in  angle  from  Lagn.  If  Budh,  Guru,  or 
Sukr  be  in  4th,  7th,  or  10th  from  Lagn,  or  be  in  the  company  of  Candr  in  Lagn,  the  native  will 
enjoy  royal  fortunes. 

8.  Coiled  Birth.  If  there  be  a  birth  in  one  of  Mesh,  Vrishabh  and  Simh  Lagnas,  containing 
either  Sani,  or  Mangal,  the  birth  of  the  child  is  with  a  coil  around  a  limb.  The  corresponding 
limb  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  Rasi,  or  Navahs,  rising. 

9.  Birth  of  Twins.  The  native,  who  has  Surya  in  a  quadruped  Rasi,  while  others  are  in  Dual 
Rasis  with  strength,  is  born,  as  one  of  the  twins. 

10.  To  Be  Nurtured  by  Three  Mothers.  If  Surya  and  Candr  join  in  one  and  the  same  Bhava 
and  fall  in  one  Navahs,  the  native  will  be  nurtured  by  three  different  mothers  for  the  first  three 
months  from  its  birth  and  will  later  on  be  brought  up  by  its  father  and  brother.  ('Bhratri'  apart 
from  meaning  a  brother  calls  for  interpretation,  as  a  near  relative  in  general) 

11.  Important.  The  learned  in  Jyotish  should  base  the  effects  on  Candr  also,  as  are  applicable 
to  Lagn.  Now  explained  are  clues  to  know  of  ulcers,  identity  marks  etc.  on  one's  person. 

12-14.  Decanates  and  Bodily  Limbs.  Head,  eyes,  ears,  nose,  temple,  chin  and  face  is  the  order 
of  limbs,  denoted  (by  the  various  Bhavas),  when  the  first  decanate  of  a  Rasi  ascends.  In  the 
case  of  the  second  decanate  ascending  the  order  is  neck,  shoulder,  arm,  side,  heart,  stomach 
and  navel.  The  order  for  the  third  decanate  ascending  is  pelvis,  anus/penis,  testicles,  thigh, 
knee,  calf  and  foot.  The  portion  already  risen  indicates  left  side  of  the  body  (while  the  one  yet 
to  rise,  i.e.  the  invisible  half,  denotes  the  right  side  of  the  body). 

15.  Limbs  Affected.  The  limb,  related  to  a  malefic  by  occupation,  will  have  ulcers,  or  scars, 
while  the  one,  related  to  a  benefic,  will  have  a  mark  (like  moles  etc).  So  say  the  Jyotishis. 
(Also  see  Sloka  6,  Ch.  4  of  Saravali,  which  states,  that  a  malefic,  or  a  benefic,  if  be  in  own 


Rasi,  or  Navahs,  the  effects  will  be  right  from  birth.  In  other  cases  it  will  be  in  the  course  of 
one's  life,  that  these  effects  will  come  to  pass) 

Ch.  13.  Effects  of  Dhan  Bhava 

1-2.  Combinations  for  Wealth.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  listen  to  me,  speaking  on  the 
effects  of  Dhan  Bhava.  If  the  Lord  of  Dhan  is  in  Dhan,  or  is  in  an  angle,  or  in  trine,  he  will 
promote  one's  wealth  (or  monetary  state).  Should  he  be  in  Ari/8th/12th,  financial  conditions 
will  decline.  A  benefic  in  Dhan  will  give  wealth,  while  a  malefic  instead  will  destroy  wealth. 

3.  One  will  be  wealthy,  if  Guru  is  in  Dhan,  as  the  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  is  with  Mangal. 

4.  If  Dhan  Lord  is  in  Labh,  while  the  Lord  of  Labh  in  Dhan,  wealth  will  be  acquired  by  the 
native.  Alternately  these  two  Lords  may  join  in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine. 

5.  If  the  Lord  of  Dhan  is  in  an  angle,  while  Labh  Lord  is  in  a  trine  thereof,  or  is  drishtied  by, 
or  yuti  with  Guru  and  Sukr,  the  subject  will  be  wealthy. 

6-7.  Yogas  for  Poverty.  One  will  be  penniless,  if  the  Lord  of  Dhan  Bhava  is  in  an  evil  Bhava, 
while  the  Lord  of  Labh  Bhava  is  also  so  placed  and  Dhan  Bhava  is  occupied  by  a  malefic. 
There  will  be  penury  right  from  birth  and  the  native  will  have  to  beg  even  for  his  food,  if  the 
Lords  of  Dhan  and  Labh  Bhava  are  both  combust,  or  with  malefics. 

8.  Loss  of  Wealth  through  the  King.  Should  the  Lords  of  Dhan  and  Labh  Bhava  be  relegated 
to  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  while  Mangal  is  in  Labh  Bhava  and  Rahu  is  in  Dhan  Bhava, 
the  native  will  lose  his  wealth  on  account  of  royal  punishments. 

9.  Expenses  on  Good  Accounts.  When  Guru  is  in  Labh,  Sukr  is  in  Dhan  and  a  benefic  is 
placed  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  while  Dhan' s  Lord  is  yuti  with  a  benefic,  there  will  be  expenses  on 
religious,  or  charitable  grounds. 

10.  Fame  etc.  If  Dhan' s  Lord  is  in  own  Rasi,  or  is  exalted,  the  native  will  look  after  his 
people,  will  help  others  and  also  will  become  famous. 

11.  Effortless  Aquisition.  If  Dhan' s  Lord  is  yuti  with  a  benefic  and  is  in  a  good  division,  like 
Paravatahs,  there  will  be  effortlessly  all  kinds  of  wealth  in  the  native's  family. 
("Paravatahsdau"  of  the  text  denotes  Paravat,  or  such  other  higher  Vargas:  Dhan's  Lord 
should  be  in  Paravatahs,  or  in  Devalokahs,  Brahmalokahs,  Sakravahanahs,  or  Sridhamahs  in 
the  Dash  Varg  scheme) 

12.  Eyes.  If  Dhan  Lord  is  endowed  with  strength,  the  native  will  possess  beautiful  eyes. 
Should  the  said  Grah  be  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  there  will  be  disease,  or  deformity 
of  eyes. 

13.  Untruthful  Person.  If  Dhan  Bhava  and  its  Lord  are  yuti  with  malefics,  the  native  will  be  a 
talebearer,  will  speak  untruth  and  will  be  afflicted  by  windy  diseases. 

Ch.  14.  Effects  of  Sahaj  Bhava 


1 .  O  Brahmin,  I  now  tell  you  about  Sahaj  Bhava.  Should  Sahaj  Bhava  be  yuti  with,  or 
drishtied  by  a  benefic,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  co-born  and  be  courageous. 

2.  If  Sahaj 's  Lord  along  with  Mangal  drishties  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  good 
results,  due  to  Sahaj  Bhava.  Alternatively  these  two  Grahas  may  be  in  Sahaj  itself. 

3.  Destruction  at  once  of  co-born  will  come  to  pass,  if  the  said  2  Grahas  are  together  with  a 
malefic,  or  in  a  Rasi,  owned  by  a  malefic. 

4-4 Vi.  Female  and  Male  Co-born.  If  Sahaj 's  Lord  is  a  female  Grah,  or,  if  Sahaj  Bhava  be 
occupied  by  female  Grahas,  one  will  have  sisters,  born  after  him.  Similarly  male  Grahas  and 
male  Rasis  denote  younger  brothers.  Should  it  be  of  mixed  nature,  co-born  of  both  sexes  will 
be  obtained.  These  effects  be  declared  after  assessing  the  strength  and  weakness  of  the 
concerned. 

5-6.  Should  Sahaj '  s  Lord  and  Mangal  be  together  in  Randhr  Bhava,  destruction  of  co-born 
will  result.  Happiness  in  this  respect  will  come  to  pass,  if  Mangal,  or  Sahaj 's  Lord  is  in  an 
angle,  or  in  a  trine,  or  in  exaltation,  or  friendly  divisions. 

7-11.  Number  of  Brothers  and  Sisters.  If  Budh  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  while  Sahaj's  Lord  and 
Candr  are  together,  as  the  indicator  (Mangal)  joins  Sani,  the  effects  are:  there  occurred  the 
birth  of  an  elder  sister  and  there  will  be  younger  brothers.  Furthermore,  the  third  brother  will 
die.  Should  Mangal  be  yuti  with  Rahu,  while  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  there 
will  be  loss  of  younger  brothers  and/or  sisters,  while  three  elder  brothers  and/or  sisters  were 
attained  by  the  native.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  an  angle,  while  the  significator  (Mangal)  is  exalted 
in  a  trine  and  be  yuti  with  Guru,  12  will  be  the  number  of  total  co-born.  Out  of  these  two 
elders  and  the  3rd,  the  7th,  the  9th  and  the  12th  of  the  younger  co-born  will  be  shortlived,  while 
six  of  the  said  twelve  will  be  longlived. 

12-13.  There  will  be  1  co-born,  if  Vyaya's  Lord  (some  texts  read,  as  Labh's  Lord)  joins 
Mangal  and  Guru,  while  Sahaj  Bhava  is  occupied  by  Candr.  If  Candr  is  lonely  placed  in  Sahaj 
Bhava  with  Drishti  of  male  Grahas,  there  will  be  younger  brothers,  while  the  Drishti  of  Sukr 
denotes  younger  sisters. 

14.  Adverse  Grahas.  Surya  in  Sahaj  Bhava  will  destroy  the  preborn.  The  afterborn  will  be 
destroyed,  if  Sani  is  found  in  Sahaj  Bhava.  In  the  same  situation  Mangal  will  destroy  both  the 
preborn  and  later-born. 

15.  After  estimating  the  strength  and  weakness  of  such  Yogas,  the  effects,  related  to  brothers 
and  sisters,  be  announced. 

Ch.  15.  Effects  of  Bandhu  Bhava 

1.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  thus  have  been  briefly  told  the  effects  of  Sahaj  Bhava.  Now 
listen  to  the  results,  related  to  Bandhu  Bhava. 

2.  Housing  Comforts.  One  will  have  residential  comforts  in  full  degree,  if  Bandhu  is  occupied 
by  its  Lord,  or  by  Lagn's  Lord  and  be  drishtied  by  a  benefic. 


3.  Miscellaneous.  Should  Putr's  Lord  be  in  his  own  Bhava,  or  in  own  Navahs,  or  in  exaltation, 
the  native  will  be  endowed  with  comforts,  related  to  lands,  conveyances,  houses  etc.  and 
musical  instruments. 

4.  Housing  Comforts.  If  Karm's  Lord  joins  Bandhu's  Lord  in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine,  the  native 
will  acquire  beautiful  mansions. 

5.  Relatives.  Should  Budh  be  in  Lagn,  while  Bandhu's  Lord,  being  a  benefic,  is  drishtied  by 
another  benefic,  the  native  will  be  honoured  by  his  relatives. 

6.  Long-living  Mother.  If  Bandhu  Bhava  is  occupied  by  a  benefic,  while  its  Lord  is  in  his 
exaltation  Rasi,  as  the  indicator  of  mother  is  endowed  with  strength,  the  native  will  have  a 
long-living  mother. 

7.  Happiness  of  Mother.  The  native's  mother  will  be  happy,  if  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  an  angle, 
while  Sukr  is  also  in  an  angle,  as  Budh  is  exalted. 

8.  Quadrupeds.  Surya  in  Bandhu,  Candr  and  Sani  in  Dharm  and  Mangal  in  Labh  Bhava;  this 
Yoga  will  confer  cows  and  buffaloes  on  the  native. 

9.  Dumbness.  Should  Bandhu  Bhava  be  a  Movable  one,  while  its  Lord  and  Mangal  are 
together  in  Ari,  or  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  dumb. 

10-14.  Conveyances.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  a  benefic,  while  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  fall,  or  in  Labh 
Bhava  and  the  significator  (Sukr)  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  obtain  conveyances  in  his 
12th  year.  Should  Surya  be  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  as  Bandhu's  Lord  is  exalted  and  be  with  Sukr, 
one  will  acquire  conveyances  in  his  32nd  year.  It  will  be  in  the  42nd  year,  that  one  will  be 
endowed  with  conveyances,  if  Bandhu's  Lord  joins  Karm's  Lord  in  his  (4th  Lord's)  exaltation 
Navahs.  An  exchange  between  Labh's  and  Bandhu's  Lords  will  confer  conveyances  in  the 
12th  year.  A  benefic,  related  to  Bandhu  Bhava  (and  to  its  Lord),  will  bring  with  him 
auspicious  effects  (regarding  conveyances),  while  a  malefic  will  produce  only  malefic  effects 
(in  respect  of  conveyances).  Should  a  benefic  be  in  Bandhu,  drishti  Bandhu,  or  in  yuti  with 
the  Lord  of  Bandhu,  or  a  Drishti  on  the  Lord  of  Bandhu  Bhava,  then  the  native  will  be  happy 
with  conveyances  and  be  free  from  accidents  and  dangers.  A  malefic,  replacing  the  said 
benefic,  will  cause  losses,  concerning  vehicles  and  reduce  one  to  severe  accidents. 

Ch.  16.  Effects  of  Putr  Bhava 

1-3.0  Brahmin,  now  I  tell  you  the  effects,  related  to  Putr  Bhava.  If  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and 
Putr  are  in  their  own  Rasis,  or  in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine,  one  will  enjoy  thorough  happiness 
through  his  children.  Should  Putr's  Lord  be  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  there  will  be  no 
offspring.  Should  the  Lord  of  Putr  be  combust,  or  be  with  malefics  and  be  weak,  there  will  be 
no  children;  even,  if  per  chance  issues  are  obtained,  they  will  only  quit  the  world  soon.  The 
Yuti  of  Putr's  Lord  with  Lagn's  Lord  in  a  good  Bhava  will  ensure  early  obtainment  of 
children  apart  from  happiness  through  them.  If  they  join  in  an  evil  Bhava,  they  will  prove  a 
defect  in  this  respect. 

4.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  as  Lagn's  Lord  is  yuti  with  Mangal,  the  native  will  lose  his 
very  first  child,  whereafter  his  female  will  not  be  fertile  to  yield  an  offspring. 


5.  Should  Putr's  Lord  be  in  fall  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  while  Budh  and  Ketu  are  in 
Putr  Bhava,  the  native's  wife  will  give  birth  to  one  child  only. 

6.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  fall  and  be  not  in  Drishti  to  Putr,  while  Sani  and  Budh  are  in  Putr,  the 
native's  wife  will  give  birth  to  one  child  only. 

7.  Should  Dharm's  Lord  be  in  Lagn,  while  Putr's  Lord  is  in  fall  and  Ketu  is  in  Putr  along  with 
Budh,  obtainment  of  progeny  will  be  after  a  great  deal  of  ordeal. 

8.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  or  be  in  an  inimical  Rasi,  or  be  in  fall,  or 
in  Putr  itself,  the  native  will  beget  issues  with  difficulty. 

9.  Should  Putr  Bhava  be  owned  by  Sani,  or  Budh  and  be  occupied,  or  drishtied  by  Sani  and 
Mandi,  one  will  have  adopted  issues. 

10.  Should  Surya  and  Candr  be  together  in  a  Rasi  and  in  the  same  Navahs,  the  native  will  be 
brought  up  by  three  mothers,  or  two  fathers. 

11.  Adopted  issue  is  indicated,  if  Putr  is  tenanted  by  six  Grahas,  while  its  Lord  is  in  Vyaya 
Bhava  and  Candr  and  Lagn  are  endowed  with  strength. 

12.  There  will  be  many  children,  if  Putr's  Lord  is  strong,  while  Putr  is  drishtied  by  strong 
Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr. 

13.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  with  Candr,  or  is  in  her  Decanate,  the  native  will  beget  daughters;  so  say 
Jyotishis. 

14.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  a  Movable  Rasi,  while  Sani  is  in  Putr,  as  Rahu  is  with  Candr,  the  child 
(so  born)  is  of  questionable  birth. 

15.  Undoubtedly  the  native  is  born  of  other's  loins,  if  Candr  is  in  the  8th  from  Lagn,  while 
Guru  is  in  the  8th  from  Candr.  Malefic' s  Drishti,  or  Yuti  is  essential  in  this  Yog. 

16.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  exalted,  or  be  in  Dhan,  Putr,  or  Dharm  Bhava,  or  be  yuti  with,  or  drishtied 
by  Guru,  obtainment  of  children  will  be  there. 

17.  One  will  obtain  children,  that  will  indulge  in  mean  deeds,  if  Putr  is  occupied  by  three,  or 
four  malefics,  while  Putr's  Lord  is  in  fall.  A  benefic  (including  Budh)  in  Putr  is  excluded  in 
the  said  combination. 

18.  If  Putr  is  occupied  by  Guru,  while  its  Lord  is  with  Sukr,  one  will  obtain  an  offspring  in  his 
32   ,  or  33    year. 

19.  Should  Putr's  Lord  be  in  an  angle  along  with  Guru,  the  Karak,  one  will  beget  a  child  at  the 
age  of  30,  or  36. 

20.  If  Guru  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  while  Sukr  is  in  the  9th  from  Guru  along  with  Lagn's  Lord, 
one  will  beget  a  child  at  the  age  of  40. 


21.  The  native  will  at  the  age  of  32  lose  his  child,  if  Rahu  is  in  Putr,  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Yuti 
with  a  malefic  and  Guru  is  in  debilitation. 

22.  There  will  be  loss  of  children  at  33  and  36,  if  a  malefic  is  in  the  5th  from  Guru,  while 
another  is  in  the  5*  from  Lagn. 

23.  Should  Mandi  be  in  Lagn,  while  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  fall,  grief  on  account  of  loss  of  child  at 
the  age  of  56  will  come  to  pass. 

24-32.  Number  of  Children.  There  will  be  10  sons,  if  Bandhu  Bhava  and  Ari  Bhava  are 
occupied  by  malefics,  while  Putr's  Lord  is  in  deep  exaltation,  joining  Lagn's  Lord,  as  Guru  is 
with  another  benefic.  Nine  will  be  the  number  of  sons,  that  one  will  beget,  if  Guru  is  in  deep 
exaltation,  as  Rahu  is  with  Dhan's  Lord  and  Dharm  is  occupied  by  its  own  Lord.  There  will 
be  eight  sons,  if  Guru  is  in  Putr,  or  Dharm  Bhava,  while  Putr's  Lord  is  endowed  with  strength 
and  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava.  Sani  in  Dharm  Bhava,  while  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Putr  itself, 
gives  7  sons,  out  of  which  twins  will  be  born  twice.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Putr  in  Yuti  with 
Dhan's  Lord,  there  will  be  birth  of  7  sons,  out  of  which  3  will  pass  away.  Only  one  son  is 
denoted,  if  there  be  a  malefic  in  Putr  Bhava,  while  Guru  is  in  the  5th  from  Sani,  or  vice  versa. 
If  Putr  Bhava  has  a  malefic  in  it,  or,  if  Sani  is  in  the  5th  from  Guru,  the  native  will  beget 
offspring  only  through  his  second,  or  third  wife.  Should  Putr  be  occupied  by  a  malefic,  while 
Guru  is  yuti  with  Sani  in  Putr  Bhava,  as  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava  and  Putr's  Lord  is  yuti 
with  Mangal,  one  will  live  long,  but  lose  his  children  one  after  the  other,  as  they  are  born. 

Ch.  17.  Effects  of  Ari  Bhava 

1.  O  Brahmin,  following  are  the  effects,  produced  by  Ari  Bhava,  relating  to  diseases,  ulcers 
etc.  Listen  to  this  attentively. 

2.  Ulcers/Bruises.  Should  Ari's  Lord  be  in  Ari  itself,  or  in  Lagn,  or  Randhr,  there  will  be 
ulcers,  or  bruises  on  the  body.  The  Rasi,  becoming  Ari  Bhava,  will  lead  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  concerned  limb. 

3 -5 .  Relatives  Affected.  The  Karak  of  a  relative,  or  the  Lord  of  such  a  Bhava,  j  oining  Ari '  s 
Lord,  or  being  in  Ari,  or  Randhr  Bhava,  indicates  ulcers/bruises  to  such  a  relative,  like  father. 
Surya  with  such  lordship  and  in  such  a  Bhava  denotes  such  affectation  of  head,  Candr  of  the 
face,  Mangal  of  the  neck,  Budh  of  the  navel,  Guru  of  the  nose,  Sukr  of  the  eyes,  Sani  of  the 
feet  and  the  Rahu  and  Ketu  of  the  abdomen. 

6.  Facial  Diseases.  Should  Lagn's  Lord  be  in  a  Rasi  of  Mangal,  or  of  Budh  and  has  a  Drishti 
on  Budh,  there  will  be  diseases  of  the  face. 

7-81//2.  Leprosy.  Mangal,  or  Budh,  having  ownership  of  the  ascending  Rasi  and  joining  Candr, 
Rahu  and  Sani,  will  cause  leprosy.  If  Candr  is  in  Lagn,  which  is  not  however  Cancer,  and  be 
with  Rahu,  there  will  occur  white  leprosy.  Sani  in  place  of  Rahu  will  cause  black  leprosy, 
while  Mangal  similarly  will  afflict  one  with  blood-leprosy. 

9-121/2.  Diseases  in  General.  When  Lagn  is  occupied  by  the  Lords  of  Ari  and  Randhr  Bhava 
along  with  Surya,  the  native  will  be  afflicted  by  fever  and  tumours.  Mangal,  replacing  Surya, 
will  cause  swelling  and  hardening  of  the  blood  vessels  and  wounds  and  hits  by  weapons. 
Budh  so  featuring  will  bring  in  billious  diseases,  while  Guru  in  similar  case  will  destroy  any 


disease.  Similarly  Sukr  will  cause  diseases  through  females,  Sani  windy  diseases,  Rahu 
danger  through  low-caste-men  and  Ketu  navel  diseases.  Candr  in  Yuti  with  the  Lords  of  Ari 
and  Randhr  Bhava  will  inflict  dangers  through  water  and  phlegmatic  disorders.  Similar 
estimates  be  made  from  the  respective  significators  and  Bhavas  for  relatives,  like  father. 

13-19V&  TIMING  OF  ILLNESS.  The  native  will  be  afflicted  by  illness  throughout  life,  if  Sani 
is  with  Rahu,  while  Ari  Lord  and  6th  Bhava  are  yuti  with  malefics.  One  will  suffer  from 
(severe)  fever  at  the  age  of  6  and  at  the  age  of  12,  if  Mangal  is  in  Ari,  while  Ari  Lord  is  in 
Randhr.  If  the  Candr  is  in  Dhanu/Meen,  while  Guru  is  in  Ari  from  Lagn,  one  will  suffer  from 
leprosy  at  the  age  of  19  and  22.  If  Rahu  is  in  Ari,  Lagna  Lord  is  in  Randhr  and  Mandi  is  in  an 
angle,  consumption  will  trouble  the  native  at  the  age  of  26.  Spleenary  disorders  will  be 
experienced  at  the  age  of  29  and  30,  if  the  Lords  of  6th  and  12th  are  in  exchange  of  their  Rasis. 
Sani  and  Candr  together  in  Ari  will  inflict  blood-leprosy  at  the  age  of  45.  If  Sani  is  with  an 
inimical  planet,  while  Lagn  Lord  is  in  Lagn  itself,  windy  disorders  (like  rheumatism)  will 
trouble  the  native  at  the  age  of  59. 

20-22.  UNFORTUNATE  YEARS.  Should  Candr  be  yuti  with  Ari  Lord,  while  the  8th  Lord  is 
in  Ari  and  the  12th  Lord  is  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  troubled  by  animals  at  the  age  of  eight. 
O  Brahmin,  if  Rahu  is  in  Ari,  while  Sani  is  in  Randhr  from  the  said  Rahu,  the  child  will  have 
danger  through  fire  at  the  age  of  1  and  2,  while  in  Sahaj  year  birds  will  bring  some  evils. 

23-25.  UNFORTUNATE  YEARS  (continued).  Danger  through  water  will  have  to  be  feared 
during  Putr  and  Dharm  years,  if  Surya  is  in  Ari,  or  Randhr,  while  Candr  is  in  Vyaya  from  the 
said  Surya.  Sani  in  Randhr,  as  Mangal  is  in  Yuvati,  all  cause  small-pox  in  Karm  year  and  in 
30th  year  of  age.  If  8th  Lord  joins  Rahu  in  an  angle/trine  from  Randhr  Bhava  and  be  in  Randhr 
in  Navamsa,  the  subject  will  be  troubled  by  swelling  of  blood  vessels,  urinary  disorders  etc. 
during  the  18th  year  and  the  22nd  year. 

26.  LOSS  THROUGH  ENEMIES.  Loss  of  wealth  will  come  to  pass  during  the  3 1st  year,  if 
Labh  and  6th  Lords  exchange  their  Rasis. 

27.  INIMICAL  SONS.  One's  own  sons  will  be  his  enemies,  if  Putr  Lord  is  in  Ari,  while  Ari 
Lord  is  with  Guru.  Simultaneously  Vyaya  Lord  should  be  in  Lagn. 

28.  FEAR  FROM  DOGS.  There  will  be  fear  from  dogs  during  the  10th  and  19th  year,  if  the 
Lagna  Lord  and  the  6th  Lord  are  in  exchange. 

Ch.  18.  Effects  of  Yuvati  Bhava 

1.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  listen  to  me,  detailing  the  effects  of  the  7th  Bhava.  If  Yuvati 
Lord  is  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  exaltation,  one  will  derive  full  happiness  through  his  wife  (and 
marriage). 

2.  SICK  WIFE.  Should  Yuvati  Lord  be  in  Ari,  8th,  or  Vyaya,  the  wife  will  be  sickly.  This 
however  does  not  apply  to  own  Bhava,  or  exaltation  placement,  as  above. 

3.  Excessive-Libidinousness/Death-ofWife.  If  Sukr  is  in  Yuvati,  the  native  will  be 
exceedingly  libidinous.  If  Sukr  yuti  a  malefic  in  any  Bhava,  it  will  cause  loss  of  wife. 


4-5.  THE  7th  LORD.  Should  Yuvati  Lord  be  endowed  with  strength  and  be  yuti  with,  or  be 
drishtied  by  a  benefic,  the  native  will  be  wealthy,  honourable,  happy  and  fortunate. 
Conversely,  if  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  fall,  or  is  combust,  or  is  in  an  enemy's  Rasi,  one  will  acquire 
sick  wives  and  many  wives. 

6.  PLURALITY  OF  WIVES.  If  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  a  Rasi  of  Sani,  or  of  Sukr  and  be  drishtied 
by  a  benefic,  there  will  be  many  wives.  Should  Yuvati  Lord  be  particularly  in  exaltation,  the 
same  effects  will  come  to  pass. 

7-8!A  MISCELLANEOUS  MATTERS.  The  native  will  befriend  barren  females,  if  Surya  is  in 
Yuvati.  Candr  therein  will  cause  association  with  such  female,  as  corresponding  to  the  Rasi, 
becoming  Yuvati.  Mangal,  placed  in  Yuvati,  will  denote  association  with  marriageable  girls 
(those  with  menses),  or  with  barren  females.  Budh  indicates  harlots,  mean  females  and 
females,  belonging  to  traders'  community.  Wife  of  a  Brahmin,  or  a  pregnant  female  will  be  in 
the  native's  association,  if  Guru  is  in  Yuvati.  Base  females  and  females,  having  attained  their 
courses,  are  denoted  by  Sani,  Rahu/Ketu  in  Yuvati. 

S-9lA.  Mangal  denotes  a  female  with  attractive  breasts.  Sani  indicates  sick  and  weak  spouse. 
Guru  will  bring  a  spouse  with  hard  and  prominent  breasts.  Sukr  will  bring  one  with  bulky  and 
excellent  breasts. 

lO-lS1/^.  Malefics  in  Vyaya  and  7th,  while  decreasing  Candr  is  in  Putr  denote,  that  the  native 
will  be  controlled  by  spouse,  who  will  be  inimical  to  the  race  (or  family).  If  Yuvati  Bhava  is 
occupied,  or  owned  by  Sani/Mangal,  the  native  will  beget  a  harlot,  as  his  spouse,  or  he  will  be 
attached  to  other  illegally.  Should  Sukr  be  in  a  Navamsa  of  Mangal,  or  in  a  Rasi  of  Mangal,  or 
receive  a  Drishti  from,  or  be  yuti  with  Mangal,  the  native  will  "kiss"  the  private  parts  of  the 
female.  If  Sukr  is  so  related  to  Sani,  the  native  will  "kiss"  the  private  parts  of  the  male. 


14-15.  WORTHY  SPOUSE.  The  native  will  beget  a  spouse  endowed  with  (the  seven 
principal)  virtues,  who  will  expand  his  dynasty  by  sons  and  grandsons,  if  the  7th  Lord 
exalted,  while  Yuvati  is  occupied  by  strong  Lagna  Lord  and  a  benefic. 


16.  EVILS  TO  SPOUSE.  If  Yuvati  Bhava,  or  its  Lord  is  yuti  with  a  malefic  the  native's  wife 
will  incur  evils,  especially,  if  Yuvati  Bhava,  or  its  Lord  is  bereft  of  strength. 

17.  LOSS  OF  SPOUSE.  If  Yuvati  Lord  is  devoid  of  strength  and  is  relegated  to  Ari,  8th,  or 
Vyaya,  or,  if  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  fall,  the  native's  wife  will  be  destroyed  (i.e.  she  will  die  early). 

18.  LACK  OF  CONJUGAL  FELICITY.  If  Candr  is  in  Yuvati,  as  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  and 
the  Karaka  (indicator  Sukr)  is  bereft  of  strength,  the  native  will  not  be  endowed  with  marital 
happiness. 

19-21.  PLURAL1IY  OF  WIVES.  One  will  have  two  wives,  if  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  fall,  or  in  a 
malefic  Rasi  along  with  a  malefic,  while  Yuvati  Bhava,  or  the  7th  Navamsa  belong  to  a 
eunuch  planet.  If  Mangal  and  Sukr  are  in  Yuvati,  or,  if  Sani  is  Yuvati,  while  the  Lord  of  Lagn 
is  in  Randhr,  the  native  will  have  3  wives.  There  will  be  many  wives,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Dual 
Rasi,  while  its  Lord  is  in  exaltation,  as  Yuvati  Lord  is  endowed  with  strength. 


22.  TIME  OF  MARRIAGE  (upto  Sloka  34).  If  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  a  benefic's  Bhava  (or  in 
Dharm,  as  Subha  Rasi  so  means),  while  Sukr  is  exalted,  or  is  in  own  Rasi,  the  native  will 
marry  at  the  age  of  5,  or  9. 

23.  If  Surya  is  in  Yuvati,  while  his  dispositor  is  yuti  with  Sukr,  there  will  be  marriage  at  7th,  or 
1 1th  year  of  age. 

24.  Sukr  in  Dhan,  while  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  Labh  will  give  marriage  at  the  age  of  10,  or  16. 

25.  Marriage  will  take  place  during  the  1 1th  year,  if  Sukr  is  in  an  angle  from  Lagn,  while  Lagn 
Lord  is  in  Makar,  or  Kumbh. 

26.  The  native  will  marry  at  12,  or  19,  if  Sukr  is  in  an  angle  from  the  Lagna,  while  Sani  is  in 
Yuvati  counted  from  Sukr. 

27.  Should  Sukr  be  in  Yuvati  from  Candr,  while  Sani  is  in  Yuvati  from  Sukr,  marriage  will  be 
in  the  18th  year. 


-th 


28.  Marriage  will  be  in  the  15    year,  if  Dhan  Lord  is  in  Labh,  while  Lagn  Lord  is  in  Karm. 

29.  An  exchange  between  the  Lords  of  Dhan  and  Labh  will  bring  marriage  13  years  after 
birth. 

30.  Ones  22n  I21x  year  will  confer  marriage,  if  Sukr  is  in  Yuvati  from  the  8*  Bhava  (i.e.  Dhan 
from  Lagna),  while  his  dispositor  is  yuti  with  Mangal. 

3 1 .  Should  Yuvati  Lord  be  in  Vyaya,  while  the  natal  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  in  Navamsa,  marriage 
will  be  in  23rd/26th  year  of  age. 

32.  Either  the  25th  year,  or  the  33rd  year  will  bring  marriage,  if  Randhr  Lord  is  in  Yuvati,  as 
Sukr  is  in  Navamsa  Lagna. 

33.  Should  Sukr  be  in  Dharm  from  Dharm  (i.e.  in  Putr  Bhava),  while  Rahu  is  in  one  of  the 
said  Bhavas  (i.e.  in  Putr/Dharm),  marriage  will  take  place  during  3 1st,  or  33rd  year. 

34.  The  native  will  marry  at  30,  or  27,  if  Sukr  is  in  Lagn,  while  the  7th  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  itself. 

35-39.  TIMING  OF  WIFE'S  DEATH.  Loss  of  wife  will  occur  in  the  18th  year,  or  33rd  year  of 
age  of  the  native,  if  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  fall,  while  Sukr  is  in  Randhr.  One  will  lose  his  spouse  in 
his  19th  year,  if  Yuvati  Lord  is  in  the  8th,  while  Vyaya  Lord  is  in  Yuvati.  The  native's  wife 
will  die  within  three  days  of  marriage  due  to  snake  bite,  if  the  native  has  Rahu  in  Dhan  and 
Mangal  in  Yuvati.  If  Sukr  is  in  Randhr,  while  his  dispositor  is  in  a  Rasi  of  Sani,  death  of  wife 
will  take  place  during  the  native's  12th,  or  21st  year  of  age.  Should  the  ascendat  Lord  be  in  his 
Rasi  of  debilitation,  as  Dhan  Lord  is  in  Randhr,  loss  of  wife  will  occur  in  the  13th  year  of  age. 

40-41.  THREE  MARRIAGES.  Should  Candr  be  in  Yuvati  from  Sukr,  while  Budh  is  in 
Yuvati  from  Candr  and  Randhr  Lord  is  in  Putr  (from  the  Lagna),  there  will  be  marriage  in 
Karm  year  followed  by  another  in  the  22nd  year  and  yet  another  in  the  33rd  year. 


42.  DEATH  OF  WIFE.  If  Ari,  7th  and  8th  are  in  their  order  occupied  by  Mangal,  Rahu  and 
Sani,  the  native's  wife  will  not  live  (long). 

Ch.  19.  Effects  of  Randhr  Bhava 

1.  Long  Life.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  listen  to  me  speak  on  the  effects  of  Randhr  Bhava. 
If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  an  angle,  long  life  is  indicated. 

2.  Short  Life.  Should  Randhr's  Lord  join  Lagn's  Lord,  or  a  malefic  and  be  in  Randhr  itself, 
the  native  will  be  short  lived. 

3.  Sani  and  Karm's  Lord  about  Longevity.  Similarly  consider  Sani  and  Karm's  Lord  in  the 
matter  of  longevity.  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  along  with  a  malefic  Grah  and/or  Lagn's  Lord. 

4-7.  Long  Life.  There  will  be  long  life,  if  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya,  or,  if  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Ari,  as 
Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya,  or,  if  Ari's  Lord  and  Vyaya' s  Lord  are  in  Lagn  and  Randhr.  If  the 
Lords  of  Putr,  Randhr  and  Tanu  Bhava  are  in  own  Navahsas,  own  Rasis,  or  in  friendly  Rasis, 
the  native  will  enjoy  a  long  span  of  life.  Should  the  Lords  of  Lagn,  Randhr  and  Karm  Bhava 
and  Sani  are  all  disposed  severally  in  an  angle,  in  a  trine,  or  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  subject  will 
live  long.  Like  these,  there  are  many  other  Yogas,  dealing  with  the  issue  of  longevity.  The 
strength  and  weakness  of  the  Grahas  concerned  be  estimated  in  deciding  longevity. 

8-13.  Short  Life.  One's  span  of  life  will  be  between  20  and  32  years,  if  Lagn's  Lord  is  weak, 
while  Randhr's  Lord  is  an  angle.  The  native  will  only  be  short-lived,  if  Randhr's  Lord  is  in 
fall,  while  Randhr  Bhava  has  a  malefic  in  it  and  Tanu  Bhava  is  bereft  of  strength.  Death  will 
be  instant  at  birth,  if  Randhr  Bhava,  Randhr's  Lord  and  Vyaya  Bhava  are  all  conjunct 
malefics.  Malefics  in  angles  and/or  trines  and  benefics  in  Ari  and/or  Randhr  Bhava,  while 
Tanu  Bhava  has  in  it  Randhr's  Lord  in  fall:  this  Yoga  will  cause  immediate  end.  If  Putr  and 
Randhr  Bhava  and  Randhr's  Lord  are  all  conjunct  malefics,  the  life  span  will  be  very  brief. 
Within  a  month  of  birth,  death  will  befall  the  child,  if  Randhr's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  itself,  while 
Candr  is  with  malefics  and  be  bereft  of  beneficial  Drishti. 

14-15.  Long  Life  (again).  One  will  be  long-lived,  if  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  exaltation,  while  Candr 
and  Guru  are,  respectively,  in  Labh  and  Randhr  Bhava.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  exceedingly  strong 
and  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  which  is  placed  in  an  angle,  the  person  concerned  will 
be  wealthy,  virtuous  and  long-lived. 

Ch.  20.  Effects  of  Dharm  Bhava 

(1)  Combinations  for  Fortunes.  O  Brahmin,  now  listen  to  the  effects  of  Dharm  Bhava.  One 
will  be  fortunate  (or  affluent),  if  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava  with  strength. 

(2)  Should  Guru  be  in  Dharm  Bhava,  while  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  an  angle  and  Lagn's  Lord  is 
endowed  with  strength,  one  will  be  extremely  fortunate. 

3.  Fortunate  (Affluent)  Father.  If  Dharm' s  Lord  is  with  strength,  as  Sukr  is  in  Dharm,  while 
Guru  is  in  an  angle  from  Tanu  Bhava,  the  native's  father  is  fortunate. 


4.  Indigent  Father.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  debilitated,  while  the  2n  and/or  the  4l  from  Dharm 
Bhava  is  occupied  by  Mangal,  the  native's  father  is  poor. 

5.  Long-living  Father.  Should  Dharm's  Lord  be  in  deep  exaltation,  while  Sukr  is  in  an  angle 
from  Tanu  Bhava  and  Guru  is  in  the  9th  from  Navahs  Lagn,  the  father  of  the  native  will  enjoy 
along  span  of  life. 

6.  Royal  Status  for  Father.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  an  angle  and  receives  a  Drishti  from  Guru,  the 
native's  father  will  be  a  king  endowed  with  conveyances,  or  be  equal  to  a  king. 

7.  Wealthy  and  Famous  Father.  Should  Dharm's  Lord  be  in  Karm  Bhava,  while  Karm's  Lord 
receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic  the  native's  father  will  be  very  rich  and  famous. 

8-9.  Virtuous  and  Devoted  to  Father.  Should  Surya  be  in  deep  exaltation,  as  Dharm's  Lord  is 
in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  virtuous,  dear  to  the  king  and  devoted  to  father.  If  Surya  is 
in  a  trine  from  Lagna,  while  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  in  yuti  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti 
from  Guru,  the  native  will  be  devoted  to  his  father. 

10.  Fortunes  etc.  Acquisition  of  fortunes,  conveyances  and  fame  will  follow  the  32nd  year  of 
age,  if  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Dhan,  while  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Dharm. 

11.  Inimical  to  Father.  There  will  be  mutual  enmity  between  the  father  and  the  native,  if 
Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  but  with  the  Lord  of  Ari.  Further,  the  native's  father  will  be 
of  contemptible  disposition. 

12.  Begged  Food.  If  Karm's  Lord  and  Sahaj's  Lord  are  bereft  of  strength,  while  Dharm's 
Lord  is  in  fall,  or  combust  the  native  will  go  begging  for  his  food. 

13-25.  Combinations  for  Father's  Death.  The  father  of  the  native  would  have  passed  away 
prior  to  the  native's  birth,  if  Surya  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  as  Randhr's  Lord  is  in 
Dharm  Bhava,  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Tanu  Bhava  and  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava.  Should  Surya 
be  in  Randhr  Bhava,  while  Randhr's  Lord  is  in  Dharm,  the  native's  father  will  pass  away 
within  a  year  of  his  birth.  If  the  Lord  of  Vyaya  Bhava  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  while  Dharm's 
Lord  is  in  its  debilitation  Navahs,  the  native's  father  will  face  his  end  during  the  3rd,  or  the 
16th  year  of  the  native.  Death  of  father  will  occur  in  the  2nd,  or  the  12th  year,  if  Lagn's  Lord  is 
in  Randhr  Bhava,  as  Randhr's  Lord  is  with  Surya.  Should  Rahu  be  in  the  8th  from  Dharm,  as 
Surya  is  in  the  9th  from  Dharm,  death  of  father  will  take  place  in  the  16th,  or  the  18th  year  of 
the  native.  If  Sani  is  in  the  9th  from  Candr,  as  Surya  is  with  Rahu,  the  native's  father  will  die 
in  the  7l  ,  or  the  19*  year  of  the  native.  The  native  in  his  44l  year  will  lose  his  father,  if 
Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya,  as  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Dharm.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava, 
as  Candr  is  in  Surya's  Navahs,  the  native  in  his  35th,  or  41st  year  will  lose  his  father.  One  will 
lose  his  father  in  the  50th  year,  if  Surya,  being  the  Lord  of  Dharm,  is  conjunct  Mangal  and 
Sani.  If  Surya  is  in  the  7th  from  Dharm  Bhava,  as  Rahu  is  in  the  7th  from  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  6th, 
or  25th  year  of  the  native  will  be  fatal  for  father.  If  Sani  is  in  the  7th  from  Randhr  Bhava,  as 
Surya  is  in  the  7th  from  Sani,  the  ages  of  21,  26,  or  30  will  be  fatal  for  the  father.  If  Dharm's 
Lord  is  in  its  debilitation  Rasi,  while  his  dispositor  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  lose  his 
father  at  the  age  of  26,  or  30.  Thus  the  Jyotishis  may  know  the  effects. 

26.  Fortunes.  One  will  enjoy  abundant  fortunes,  if  Sukr  is  in  deep  exaltation  and  be  in  the 
company  of  Dharm's  Lord,  as  Sani  is  in  Sahaj. 


27-28.  Fortunate  Periods.  Abundant  fortunes  be  acquired  after  the  20th  year,  if  Dharm  has 
Guru  in  it,  as  its  Lord  is  in  an  angle  from  Lagn.  Should  Budh  be  in  his  deep  exaltation,  as 
Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Dharm  itself,  abundant  fortunes  will  be  earned  after  the  36th  year. 

29.  Should  Lagn's  Lord  be  in  Dharm,  as  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Lagn  and  Guru  is  in  Yuvati,  there 
will  be  gains  of  wealth  and  conveyances. 

30.  Lack  of  Fortunes.  If  Rahu  is  in  the  9th  from  Dharm  Bhava,  as  his  dispositor  is  in  Randhr 
Bhava  and  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  fall,  the  native  be  devoid  of  fortunes. 

3 1 .  Food  by  Begging.  Should  Sani  be  in  Dharm  Bhava  along  with  Candr,  as  Lagn's  Lord  is  in 
fall,  the  native  will  acquire  food  by  begging. 

32.  O  Brahmin,  these  are  the  effects  related  to  Dharm  Bhava.  I  have  explained  briefly.  These 
may  be  estimated  with  the  help  of  the  state  of  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and  Dharm  Bhava  and  in 
other  manners  as  well. 

Ch.  21.  Effects  of  Karm  Bhava 

1. 1  now  explain  the  effects  of  Karm  Bhava.  Listen  to  these,  o  Maitreya,  in  the  words  of 
Brahma,  Garga  and  others. 

2.  Paternal  Happiness.  If  Karm' s  Lord  is  strong  and  in  exaltation,  or  in  its  own  Rasi/Navahs, 
the  native  will  derive  extreme  paternal  happiness,  will  enjoy  fame  and  will  perform  good 
deeds. 

3.  If  Karm' s  Lord  is  devoid  of  strength,  the  native  will  face  obstructions  in  his  work.  If  Rahu 
is  in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine,  he  will  perform  religious  sacrifices,  like  Jyotishtoma. 

4.  If  Karm' s  Lord  is  with  a  benefic,  or  be  in  an  auspicious  Bhava,  one  will  always  gain 
through  royal  patronage  and  in  business.  In  a  contrary  situation,  only  opposite  results  will 
come  to  pass. 

5.  Should  Karm  and  Labh  Bhava  be  both  occupied  by  malefics,  the  native  will  indulge  only  in 
bad  deeds  and  will  defile  his  own  men. 

6.  If  the  Lord  of  Karm  Bhava  is  relegated  to  Randhr  Bhava  along  with  Rahu,  the  native  will 
hate  others;  be  a  great  fool  and  will  do  bad  deeds. 

7.  If  Sani,  Mangal  and  Karm's  Lord  are  in  Yuvati,  as  Yuvati's  Lord  is  with  a  malefic,  the 
native  will  be  fond  of  carnal  pleasures  and  of  filling  his  belly. 

8-10  Should  Karm's  Lord  be  in  exaltation  and  be  in  the  company  of  Guru,  as  Dharm's  Lord  is 
in  Karm  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  honour,  wealth  and  valour.  One  will  lead  a  happy 
life,  if  Labh' s  Lord  is  in  Karm  and  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Lagn,  or,  if  the  Lord  of  Karm  Bhava  is 
yuti  with  the  Lord  of  Labh  Bhava  in  an  angle.  Should  Karm's  Lord  in  strength  be  in  Meen 
along  Guru,  the  native  will  doubtless  obtain  robes,  ornaments  and  happiness. 

1 1 .  Should  Rahu,  Surya,  Sani  and  Mangal  be  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  cessation  of 
his  duties. 


12.  One  will  be  learned  and  wealthy,  if  Guru  is  in  Meen  along  with  Sukr,  while  Lagn's  Lord 
is  strong  and  Candr  is  in  exaltation. 

13.  Should  Karm's  Lord  be  in  Labh,  while  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Tanu  Bhava  and  Sukr  is  in 
Karm,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  precious  stones. 

14.  If  the  Karm's  Lord  is  exalted  in  an  angle,  or  a  trine  and  is  yuti  with  Guru,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  Guru,  one  will  be  endowed  with  deeds. 

15.  Should  Karm's  Lord  be  in  Lagn  along  with  Lagn's  Lord,  as  Candr  is  in  an  angle,  or  in  a 
trine,  the  native  will  be  interested  in  good  deeds. 

16.  If  Sani  is  in  Karm  Bhava  along  with  a  debilitated  Grah,  while  Karm  Bhava  in  the  Navahs 
Kundali  is  occupied  by  a  malefic,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  acts. 

17.  One  will  indulge  in  bad  acts,  if  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  while  Randhr's  Lord  is 
in  Karm  Bhava  with  a  malefic. 

18.  Obstructions  to  the  native's  acts  will  crop  up,  if  Karm's  Lord  is  in  fall,  as  both  Karm 
Bhava  and  the  10th  from  Karm  Bhava  have  malefic  occupations. 

19-21 .  Combinations  for  Fame.  One  will  be  endowed  with  fame,  if  Candr  is  in  Karm  Bhava, 
while  Karm's  Lord  is  in  a  trine  from  Karm  Bhava  and  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Lagn's  angle.  Similar 
effects  will  come  to  pass,  if  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  while  Karm's  Lord  is  strong  and 
gives  a  Drishti  to  Guru.  Fame  will  come  to  the  native,  if  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  as 
Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava  and  Candr  is  in  Putr  Bhava. 

22.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  thus  have  been  told  about  the  effects  of  Karm  Bhava  in  a 
brief  manner.  Other  related  effects  be  guessed  by  you  based  on  the  relationship  of  the  Lords 
of  Lagn  and  of  Karm  Bhava. 

Ch.  22.  Effects  of  Labh  Bhava 

1.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  I  now  explain  effects  relating  to  Labh  Bhava,  the 
auspiciousness  of  which  Bhava  will  make  one  happy  at  all  times. 

2.  Should  Labh's  Lord  be  in  Labh  itself,  or  be  in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine  from  Lagn,  there  will 
be  many  gains.  Similarly,  if  Labh's  Lord  is  exalted,  though  in  combustion  there  will  be  many 
gains. 

3.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  while  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  an  angle  along  with  Guru,  the 
gains  will  be  great. 

4.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  while  Labh  Bhava  is  occupied  by  a  benefic,  the  native 
will  gain  2000  Nishkas  in  his  36l  year. 

5.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  yuti  with  a  benefic  in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine,  the  native  will  acquire  500 
Nishkas  in  his  40l  year. 


6.  The  native  will  own  6000  Nishkas,  if  Labh  Bhava  is  occupied  by  Guru,  while  Dhan  Bhava 
and  Dharm  Bhava  are,  respectively,  taken  over  by  Candr  and  Sukr  by  position. 

7.  Should  Guru,  Budh  and  Candr  be  in  the  1 1th  from  Labh,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with 
wealth,  grains,  fortunes,  diamonds,  ornaments  etc. 

8.  One  will  gain  1000  Nishkas  in  his  33rd  year,  if  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Lagn  and  Lagn's  Lord  is 
in  Labh  Bhava. 

9.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  as  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  one  will  amass 
abundant  fortunes  after  marriage. 

10.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  as  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  one  will  gain  wealth 
through  co-borns  and  will  be  endowed  with  excellent  ornaments. 

11.  There  will  be  no  gains  in  spite  of  numerous  efforts,  if  Labh's  Lord  is  in  fall,  in 
combustion,  or  be  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava  with  a  malefic. 


Ch.  23.  Effects  of  Vyaya  Bhava 


1-4.  O  Brahmin,  now  I  tell  you  about  the  effects  of  Vyaya  Bhava.  There  will  be  expenses  on 
good  accounts,  if  Vyaya' s  Lord  is  with  a  benefic,  or  in  his  own  Bhava,  or  exalted,  or,  if  a 
benefic  occupies  Vyaya.  One  will  own  beautiful  houses  and  beds  and  be  endowed  with 
superior  scented  articles  and  pleasures,  if  Candr  happens  to  be  Vyaya' s  Lord  and  be  exalted, 
or  be  in  its  own  Rasi  and/or  Navahs,  or  in  Labh/Dharm/Putr  Bhava  in  Rasi/Navahs.  The  said 
native  will  live  with  rich  clothes  and  ornaments,  be  learned  and  Lordly. 

5-6.  And,  if  Vyaya' s  Lord  is  in  Ari,  or  Randhr  Bhava,  or  be  in  enemy's  Navahs,  in 
debilitation  Navahs,  or  in  Randhr  Bhava  in  Navahs,  one  will  be  devoid  of  happiness  from 
wife,  be  troubled  by  expenses  and  deprived  of  general  happiness.  If  he  be  in  an  angle,  or  trine, 
the  native  will  beget  a  spouse. 

7.  Just  as  these  effects  are  derived  from  Tanu  Bhava  in  regard  to  the  native,  similar  deductions 
be  made  about  co-borns  etc.  from  Sahaj  and  other  Bhavas. 

8.  Grahas  placed  in  the  visible  half  of  the  zodiac  will  give  explicit  results,  while  the  ones  in 
the  invisible  half  will  confer  secret  results. 

9.  If  Rahu  is  in  Vyaya  along  with  Mangal,  Sani  and  Surya,  the  native  will  go  to  hell.  Similar 
effect  will  occur,  if  Vyaya' s  Lord  is  with  Surya. 

10.  If  there  is  a  benefic  in  Vyaya,  while  its  Lord  is  exalted,  or  is  yuti  with,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  a  benefic,  one  will  attain  final  emancipation. 

11.  One  will  wander  from  country  to  country,  if  Vyaya' s  Lord  and  Vyaya  Bhava  are  with 
malefics  and  Vyaya' s  Lord  gives  a  Drishti  to,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  malefics. 

12.  One  will  move  in  his  own  country,  if  Vyaya' s  Lord  and  Vyaya  Bhava  are  with  benefics 
and  Vyaya' s  Lord  gives  a  Drishti  to,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics. 


13.  Earnings  will  be  through  sinful  measures,  if  Vyaya  is  occupied  by  Sani,  or  Mangal  etc. 
and  is  not  receiving  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic. 

14.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya,  while  Vyaya' s  Lord  is  in  Lagn  with  Sukr,  expenses  will  be  on 
religious  grounds. 

Ch.  24.  Effects  of  the  Bhava  Lords 

1.  Effects  of  Lagn's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  12).  Should  Lagn's  Lord  be  in  Lagn 
itself,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  physical  happiness  and  prowess.  He  will  be  intelligent, 
fickle-minded,  will  have  two  wives  and  will  unite  with  other  females. 

2.  If  the  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Dhan,  he  will  be  gainful,  scholarly,  happy,  endowed  with  good 
qualities,  be  religious,  honourable  and  will  have  many  wives. 

3.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  equal  a  lion  in  valour,  be  endowed  with  all 
kinds  of  wealth,  be  honourable,  will  have  two  wives,  be  intelligent  and  happy. 

4.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  paternal  and  maternal 
happiness,  will  have  many  brothers,  be  lustful,  virtuous  and  charming. 

5.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  mediocre  progenic  happiness,  will  lose 
his  first  child,  be  honourable,  given  to  anger  and  be  dear  to  king. 

6.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava  and  related  to  a  malefic  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  physical 
happiness  and  will  be  troubled  by  enemies,  if  there  is  no  benefic  Drishti. 

7.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  a  malefic  and  is  placed  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  natives  wife  will  not  live 
(long).  If  the  Grah  in  question  is  a  benefic,  one  will  wander  aimlessly,  face  penury  and  be 
dejected.  He  will  alternatively  become  a  king  (if  the  said  Grah  is  strong). 

8.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  an  accomplished  scholar,  be  sickly, 
thievish,  be  given  to  much  anger,  be  a  gambler  and  will  join  others'  wives. 

9.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  fortunate,  dear  to  people,  be  a  devotee 
of  Sri  Vishnu,  be  skilful,  eloquent  in  speech  and  be  endowed  with  wife,  sons  and  wealth. 

10.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  paternal  happiness, 
royal  honour,  fame  among  men  and  will  doubtlessly  have  self-earned  wealth. 

11.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  always  be  endowed  with  gains,  good 
qualities,  fame  and  many  wives. 

(12)  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava  and  is  devoid  of  benefic  Drishti  and/or  Yuti,  the  native 
will  be  bereft  of  physical  happiness,  will  spend  unfruitfully  and  be  given  to  much  anger. 

13.  Effects  of  Dhan' s  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  24).  If  Dhan' s  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  sons  and  wealth,  be  inimical  to  his  family,  lustful, 
hard-hearted  and  will  do  others'  jobs. 


14.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wealthy,  proud,  will  have  two,  or 
more  wives  and  be  bereft  of  progeny. 

15.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  valorous,  wise,  virtuous,  lustful  and 
miserly;  all  these,  when  related  to  a  benefic.  If  related  to  a  malefic,  the  native  will  be  a 
heterodox. 

16.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  acquire  all  kinds  of  wealth.  If  Dhan's 
Lord  is  exalted  and  is  yuti  with  Guru,  one  will  be  equal  to  a  king. 

17.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wealthy.  Not  only  the  native,  but  also 
his  sons  will  be  intent  on  earning  wealth. 

18.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava  along  with  a  benefic,  the  native  will  gain  wealth  through 
his  enemies;  if  Dhan's  Lord  is  yuti  with  a  malefic,  there  will  be  loss  through  enemies  apart 
from  mutilation  of  shanks. 

19.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  addicted  to  others'  wives  and  he  will 
be  a  doctor.  If  a  malefic  is  related  to  the  said  placement  by  yuti  with  Dhan's  Lord,  or  by 
Drishti,  the  native's  wife  will  be  of  questionable  character. 

20.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  abundant  land  and 
wealth.  But  he  will  have  limited  marital  felicity  and  be  bereft  of  happiness  from  his  elder 
brother. 

21.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wealthy,  diligent,  skilful,  sick  during 
childhood  and  will  later  on  be  happy  and  will  visit  shrines,  observing  religious  code  etc. 

22.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  libidinous,  honourable  and  learned;  he 
will  have  many  wives  and  much  wealth,  but  he  will  be  bereft  of  filial  happiness. 

23.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  all  kinds  of  wealth,  be  ever  diligent, 
honourable  and  famous. 

24.  If  Dhan's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  adventurous,  be  devoid  of  wealth  and 
be  interested  in  other's  wealth,  while  his  eldest  child  will  not  keep  him  happy. 

25.  Effects  of  Sahaj's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  36).  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  have  self-made  wealth,  be  disposed  to  worship,  be  valorous  and  be 
intelligent,  although  devoid  of  learning. 

26.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  corpulent,  devoid  of  valour,  will  not 
make  much  efforts,  be  not  happy  and  will  have  an  eye  on  others'  wives  and  others'  wealth. 

27.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  happiness  through  co- 
born  and  will  have  wealth  and  sons,  be  cheerful  and  extremely  happy. 

28.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  wealthy  and  intelligent,  but 
will  acquire  a  wicked  spouse. 


29.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  sons  and  be  virtuous.  If  in  the 
process  Sahaj's  Lord  be  yuti  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  the  native  will  have  a 
formidable  wife. 

30.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  inimical  to  his  co-born,  be  affluent,  will 
not  be  well  disposed  to  his  maternal  uncle  and  be  dear  to  his  maternal  aunt. 

3 1 .  If  Sahaj  's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  interested  in  serving  the  king.  He 
will  not  be  happy  during  boyhood,  but  the  end  of  his  life  he  will  be  happy. 

32.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  a  thief,  will  derive  his  livelihood 
serving  others  and  will  die  at  the  gate  of  the  royal  palace. 

33.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  lack  paternal  bliss,  will  make  fortunes 
through  wife  and  will  enjoy  progenic  and  other  pleasures. 

34.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  all  lands  of  happiness  and  self- 
made  wealth  and  be  interested  in  nurturing  wicked  females. 

35.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  then  native  will  always  gain  in  trading,  be  intelligent, 
although  not  literate,  be  adventurous  and  will  serve  others. 

36.  If  Sahaj's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya,  the  native  will  spend  on  evil  deeds,  will  have  a  wicked  father 
and  will  be  fortunate  through  a  female. 

37.  Effects  of  Bandhu's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  48).  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  learning,  virtues,  ornaments,  lands,  conveyances  and 
maternal  happiness. 

38.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  pleasures,  all  kinds  of  wealth, 
family  life  and  honour  and  be  adventurous.  He  will  be  cunning  in  disposition. 

39.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  valorous,  will  have  servants,  be 
liberal,  virtuous  and  charitable  and  will  possess  self-earned  wealth.  He  will  be  free  from 
diseases. 

40.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu,  the  native  will  be  a  minister  and  will  possess  all  kinds  of 
wealth.  He  will  be  skilful,  virtuous,  honourable,  learned,  happy  and  be  well  disposed  to  his 
spouse. 

41.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy  and  be  liked  by  all.  He  will  be 
devoted  to  Sri  Vishnu,  be  virtuous,  honourable  and  will  have  self-earned  wealth. 

42.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  maternal  happiness,  be 
given  to  anger,  be  a  thief  and  a  conjurer,  be  independent  in  action  and  be  indisposed. 

43.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  a  high  degree  of 
education,  will  sacrifice  his  patrimony  and  be  akin  to  the  dumb  in  an  assembly. 


44.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  domestic  and  other 
comforts,  will  not  enjoy  much  parental  happiness  and  be  equal  to  a  neuter. 

45.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  dear  to  one  and  all,  be  devoted  to 
God,  be  virtuous,  honourable  and  endowed  with  every  land  of  happiness. 

46.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  royal  honours,  be  an  alchemist, 
be  extremely  pleased,  will  enjoy  pleasures  and  will  conquer  his  five  senses. 

47.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  fear  of  secret  disease,  he  will  be 
liberal,  virtuous,  charitable  and  helpful  to  others. 

48.  If  Bandhu's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  domestic  and  other 
comforts,  will  have  vices  and  be  foolish  and  indolent. 

49.  Effects  of  Putr's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  60).  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Lagn,  the 
native  will  be  scholarly,  be  endowed  with  progenic  happiness,  be  a  miser,  be  crooked  and  will 
steal  others'  wealth. 

50.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  many  sons  and  wealth,  be  a  pater 
familias,  be  honourable,  be  attached  to  his  spouse  and  be  famous  in  the  world. 

51.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj,  the  native  will  be  attached  to  his  co-born,  be  a  tale  bearer  and  a 
miser  and  be  always  interested  in  his  own  work. 

52.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  endowed  with  maternal 
happiness,  wealth  and  intelligence  and  be  a  king,  or  a  minister,  or  a  preceptor. 

53.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  progeny,  if  related  to  a  benefic;  there 
will  be  no  issues,  if  malefic  is  related  to  Putr's  Lord,  placed  in  Putr  Bhava.  Putr's  Lord  in  Putr 
Bhava  will,  however,  make  one  virtuous  and  dear  to  friends. 

54.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  obtain  such  sons,  who  will  be  equal  to  his 
enemies,  or  will  lose  them,  or  will  acquire  an  adopted,  or  purchased  son. 

55.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  honourable,  very  religious,  endowed 
with  progenic  happiness  and  be  helpful  to  others. 

56.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  not  have  much  progenic  happiness,  be 
troubled  by  cough  and  pulmonary  disorders,  be  given  to  anger  and  be  devoid  of  happiness. 

57.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  a  prince,  or  equal  to  him,  will  author 
treatises,  be  famous  and  will  shine  in  his  race. 

58.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  a  Raj  Yog  and  various  pleasures 
and  be  very  famous. 

59.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  learned,  dear  to  people,  be  an  author  of 
treatises,  be  very  skilful  and  be  endowed  with  many  sons  and  wealth. 


60.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  happiness  from  his  own  sons, 
will  have  an  adopted,  or  purchased  son. 

61.  Effects  of  Ari's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  72).  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Tanu  Bhava, 
the  native  will  be  sickly,  famous,  inimical  to  his  own  men,  rich,  honourable,  adventurous  and 
virtuous. 

62.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  adventurous,  famous  among  his  people, 
will  live  in  alien  countries,  be  happy,  be  a  skilful  speaker  and  be  always  interested  in  his  own 
work. 

63.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  given  to  anger,  be  bereft  of  courage, 
inimical  to  all  of  his  co-born  and  will  have  disobedient  servants. 

64.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  maternal  happiness,  be 
intelligent,  be  a  tale  bearer,  be  jealous,  evil-minded  and  very  rich. 

65.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  fluctuating  finances.  He  will  incur 
enmity  with  his  sons  and  friends.  He  will  be  happy,  selfish  and  kind. 

66.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  enmity  with  the  group  of  his  kinsmen, 
but  be  friendly  to  others  and  will  enjoy  mediocre  happiness  in  matters,  like  wealth. 

67.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  deprived  of  happiness  through 
wedlock.  He  will  be  famous,  virtuous,  honourable,  adventurous  and  wealthy. 

68.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  sickly,  inimical,  will  desire  others' 
wealth,  be  interested  in  others'  wives  and  be  impure. 

69.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  trade  in  wood  and  stones  ('Pashan'  also 
means  poison)  and  will  have  fluctuating  professional  fortunes. 

70.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  well  known  among  his  men,  will  not  be 
respectfully  disposed  to  his  father  and  will  be  happy  in  foreign  countries.  He  will  be  a  gifted 
speaker. 

71.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  gain  wealth  through  his  enemies,  be 
virtuous,  adventurous  and  will  be  somewhat  bereft  of  progenic  happiness. 

72.  If  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  always  spend  on  vices,  be  hostile  to 
learned  people  and  will  torture  living  beings. 

73.  Effects  of  Yuvati's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  84).  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  go  to  others'  wives,  be  wicked,  skilful,  devoid  of  courage  and  afflicted 
by  windy  diseases. 

74.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  many  wives,  will  gain  wealth 
through  his  wife  and  be  procrastinating  in  nature. 


75.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  face  loss  of  children  and  sometimes 
with  great  difficulty  there  will  exist  a  living  son.  There  is  also  the  possibility  of  birth  of  a 
daughter. 

76.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  wife  of  the  native  will  not  be  under  his  control. 
He  will  be  fond  of  truth,  intelligent  and  religious.  He  will  suffer  from  dental  diseases. 

77.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  honourable,  endowed  with  all  (i.e. 
seven  principal)  virtues,  always  delighted  and  endowed  with  all  kinds  of  wealth. 

78.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  beget  a  sickly  wife  and  he  will  be  inimical 
to  her.  He  will  be  given  to  anger  and  will  be  devoid  of  happiness. 

79.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  happiness  through 
wife,  be  courageous,  skilful  and  intelligent,  but  only  afflicted  by  windy  diseases. 

80.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  deprived  of  marital  happiness.  His 
wife  will  be  troubled  by  diseases,  be  devoid  of  good  disposition  and  will  not  obey  the  native. 

81.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  union  with  many  women,  be 
well  disposed  to  his  own  wife  and  will  have  many  undertakings. 

82.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  beget  a  disobedient  wife,  will  be 
religious  and  endowed  with  wealth,  sons  etc. 

83.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  gain  wealth  through  his  wife,  be 
endowed  with  less  happiness  from  sons  etc.  and  will  have  daughters. 

84.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  penury,  be  a  miser  and  his 
livelihood  will  be  related  to  clothes.  His  wife  will  be  a  spendthrift. 

85.  Effects  of  Randhr' s  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  96).  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  physical  felicity  and  will  suffer  from  wounds.  He  will  be 
hostile  to  gods  and  Brahmins. 

86.  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  bodily  vigour,  will  enjoy  a 
little  wealth  and  will  not  regain  lost  wealth. 

87.  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  fraternal  happiness,  be 
indolent  and  devoid  of  servants  and  strength. 

88.  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  child  will  be  deprived  of  its  mother.  He  will  be 
devoid  of  a  house,  lands  and  happiness  and  will  doubtlessly  betray  his  friends. 

89.  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  dull  witted,  will  have  limited  number 
of  children,  be  long-lived  and  wealthy. 

90.  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  win  over  his  enemies,  be  afflicted  by 
diseases  and  during  childhood  will  incur  danger  through  snakes  and  water. 


91.  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  two  wives.  If  Randhr's  Lord  is 
yuti  with  a  malefic  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  there  will  surely  be  downfall  in  his  business. 

92.  If  Randhr's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  long-lived.  If  the  said  Grah  is 
weak,  being  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  longevity  will  be  medium,  while  the  native  will  be  a  thief, 
be  blameworthy  and  will  blame  others  as  well. 

93.  If  Randhr's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  betray  his  religion,  be  a  heterodox, 
will  beget  a  wicked  wife  and  will  steal  others'  wealth. 

94.  If  Randhr's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  paternal  bliss,  be  a 
talebearer  and  be  bereft  of  livelihood.  If  there  is  a  Drishti  in  the  process  from  a  benefic,  then 
these  evils  will  not  mature. 

95.  If  Randhr's  Lord  along  with  a  malefic  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of 
wealth  and  will  be  miserable  in  boyhood,  but  happy  later  on.  Should  Randhr's  Lord  be  yuti 
with  a  benefic  and  be  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  long-lived. 

96.  If  Randhr's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  spend  on  evil  deeds  and  will  incur  a 
short  life.  More  so,  if  there  be  additionally  a  malefic  in  the  said  Bhava. 

97.  Effects  of  Dharm' s  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  103).  If  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in 
Lagn,  the  native  will  be  fortunate,  will  be  honoured  by  the  king,  be  virtuous,  charming, 
learned  and  honoured  by  the  public. 

98.  If  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  a  scholar,  be  dear  to  all,  wealthy, 
sensuous  and  endowed  with  happiness  from  wife,  sons  etc. 

99.  If  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  fraternal  bliss,  be 
wealthy,  virtuous  and  charming. 

100.  If  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  houses,  conveyances  and 
happiness,  will  have  all  kinds  of  wealth  and  be  devoted  to  his  mother. 

101.  If  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  sons  and  prosperity, 
devoted  to  elders,  bold,  charitable  and  learned. 

102.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  meagre  prosperity,  be  devoid  of 
happiness  from  maternal  relatives  and  be  always  troubled  by  enemies. 

103.  O  Brahmin,  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  beget  happiness  after 
marriage,  be  virtuous  and  famous. 

104.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  not  be  prosperous  and  will  not  enjoy 
happiness  from  his  elder  brother. 

105.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  abundant  fortunes, 
virtues  and  beauty  and  will  enjoy  much  happiness  from  co-born. 


106.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  a  king,  or  equal  to  him,  or  be  a 
minister,  or  an  Army  chief,  be  virtuous  and  dear  to  all. 

107.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  financial  gains  day  by  day,  be 
devoted  to  elders,  virtuous  and  meritorious  in  acts. 

108.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  loss  of  fortunes,  will  always 
spend  on  auspicious  acts  and  will  become  poor  on  account  of  entertaining  guests. 

109.  Effects  of  Karm's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  120).  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  scholarly,  famous,  be  a  poet,  will  incur  diseases  in  boyhood  and  be 
happy  later  on.  His  wealth  will  increase  day  by  day. 

110  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wealthy,  virtuous,  honoured  by  the 
king,  charitable  and  will  enjoy  happiness  from  father  and  others. 

111.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  happiness  from  brothers  and 
servants,  be  valorous,  virtuous,  eloquent  and  truthful. 

1 12.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  be  always  interested  in  his 
mother's  welfare,  will  Lord  over  conveyances,  lands  and  houses,  be  virtuous  and  wealthy. 

113.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  all  kinds  of  learning,  he 
will  be  always  delighted  and  he  will  be  wealthy  and  endowed  with  sons. 

1 14.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  paternal  bliss.  Although  he 
may  be  skilful,  he  will  be  bereft  of  wealth  and  be  troubled  by  enemies. 

115.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  happiness  through 
wife,  be  intelligent,  virtuous,  eloquent,  truthful  and  religious. 

116.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  acts,  long-lived  and 
intent  on  blaming  others. 

117.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  one  born  of  royal  scion  will  become  a  king,  whereas 
an  ordinary  native  will  be  equal  to  a  king.  This  placement  will  confer  wealth  and  progenic 
happiness  etc. 

118.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  skilful  in  all  jobs,  be  valorous, 
truthful  and  devoted  to  elders. 

119.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  wealth,  happiness  and 
sons.  He  will  be  virtuous,  truthful  and  always  delighted. 

120.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  spend  through  royal  abodes,  will  have 
fear  from  enemies  and  will  be  worried  in  spite  of  being  skilful. 

121.  Effects  of  Labh's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  132).  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  genuine  in  disposition,  be  rich,  happy,  even-sighted,  be  a  poet,  be 
eloquent  in  speech  and  be  always  endowed  with  gains. 


122.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  all  kinds  of  wealth  and 
all  kinds  of  accomplishments,  charitable,  religious  and  always  happy. 

123.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  skilful  in  all  jobs,  wealthy,  endowed 
with  fraternal  bliss  and  may  sometimes  incur  gout  pains. 

12.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  gain  from  maternal  relatives,  will 
undertake  visits  to  shrines  and  will  possess  happiness  of  house  and  lands. 

125.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  educated  and  virtuous.  He  will 
be  religious  and  happy. 

126.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  afflicted  by  diseases,  be  cruel,  living  in 
foreign  places  and  troubled  by  enemies. 

127.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  always  gain  through  his  wife's 
relatives,  be  liberal,  virtuous,  sensuous  and  will  remain  at  the  command  of  his  spouse. 

128.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  reversals  in  his  undertakings  and 
will  live  long,  while  his  wife  will  predecease  him. 

129.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  fortunate,  skilful,  truthful,  honoured 
by  the  king  and  be  affluent. 

130.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  honoured  by  the  king,  be  virtuous, 
attached  to  his  religion,  intelligent,  truthful  and  will  subdue  his  senses. 

131.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  gain  in  all  his  undertakings,  while  his 
learning  and  happiness  will  be  on  the  increase  day  by  day. 

132.  If  Labh's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  always  depend  on  good  deeds,  be 
sensuous,  will  have  many  wives  and  will  befriend  barbarians. 

133.  Effects  of  Vyaya's  Lord  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  144).  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  a  spendthrift,  be  weak  in  constitution,  will  suffer  from  phlegmatic 
disorders  and  be  devoid  of  wealth  and  learning. 

134.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  always  spend  on  inauspicious  deeds, 
be  religious,  will  speak  sweetly  and  will  be  endowed  with  virtues  and  happiness. 

135.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  fraternal  bliss,  will  hate 
others  and  will  promote  self-nourishment. 

136.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  maternal  happiness  and 
will  day  by  day  accrue  losses  with  respect  to  lands,  conveyances  and  houses. 

137.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  sons  and  learning.  He  will 
spend,  as  well  as  visit  shrines  in  order  to  beget  a  son. 


138.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  enmity  with  his  own  men,  be  given 
to  anger,  be  sinful,  miserable  and  will  go  to  others'  wives. 

(139)  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  expenditure  on  account  of  his 
wife,  will  not  enjoy  conjugal  bliss  and  will  be  bereft  of  learning  and  strength. 

140.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  always  gain,  will  speak  affably,  will 
enjoy  a  medium  span  of  life  and  be  endowed  with  all  good  qualities. 

141.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  dishonour  his  elders,  be  inimical 
even  to  his  friends  and  be  always  intent  on  achieving  his  own  ends. 

142.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  expenditure  through  royal 
persons  and  will  enjoy  only  moderate  paternal  bliss. 

143.  If  Vyaya  Lord  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  incur  losses,  be  brought  up  by  others  and 
will  sometimes  gain  through  others. 

144.  If  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  only  face  heavy  expenditure,  will  not 
have  physical  felicity,  be  irritable  and  spiteful. 

145-148.  Miscellaneous.  O  Brahmin,  those  are  the  effects  of  Bhava  Lords,  which  are  to  be 
deduced,  considering  their  strengths  and  weaknesses.  In  the  case  of  a  Grah,  owning  two 
Bhavas,  the  results  are  to  be  deducted  based  on  its  two  lordships.  If  contrary  results  are  thus 
indicated,  the  results  will  be  nullified,  while  results  of  varied  nature  will  come  to  pass.  The 
Grah  will  yield  full,  half,  or  a  quarter  of  the  effects  according  to  its  strength  being  full, 
medium  and  negligible,  respectively.  Thus  I  have  told  you  about  the  effects,  due  to  Bhava 
Lords  in  various  Bhavas. 

Ch.  25.  Effects  of  Non-Luminous  Grahas 

1.  Thus  I  have  explained  the  effects  of  the  seven  Grahas,  viz.  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh, 
Guru,  Sukr,  Sani,  Rahu  and  Ketu.  Now  I  tell  you  about  the  effects  of  non4uminous  Grahas. 

2.  Effects  of  Dhum  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  13).  If  Dhum  is  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  be 
valiant,  endowed  with  beautiful  eyes,  stupefied  in  disposition,  unkind,  wicked  and  highly 
short-tempered. 

3.  If  Dhum  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  sickly,  wealthy,  devoid  of  a  limb,  will  incur 
humiliation  at  royal  level,  be  dull  witted  and  be  a  eunuch. 

4.  Dhum  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  intelligent,  very  bold,  delighted,  eloquent  and  be 
endowed  with  men  and  wealth. 

5.  If  Dhum  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  grieved  on  account  of  being  given  up  by  his 
female,  but  will  be  learned  in  all  Shastras. 

6.  If  Dhum  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  limited  progeny,  be  devoid  of  wealth,  be 
great,  will  eat  anything  and  be  bereft  of  friends  and  Mantras. 


7.  If  Dhum  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  strong,  will  conquer  his  enemies,  be  very 
brilliant,  famous  and  free  from  diseases. 

8.  If  Dhum  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  penniless,  be  ever  sensuous,  skilful  in  going 
to  others'  females  and  be  always  devoid  of  brilliance. 

9.  If  Dhum  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  courage,  but  be  enthusiastic,  be 
truthful,  disagreeable,  hardhearted  and  selfish. 

10.  If  Dhum  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  sons  and  fortunes,  be  rich, 
honourable,  kind,  religious  and  well  disposed  to  his  relatives. 

11.  If  Dhum  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  sons  and  fortunes,  be 
delighted,  intelligent,  happy  and  truthful. 

12.  If  Dhum  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  wealth,  grains  and  gold,  be 
beautiful,  will  have  knowledge  of  arts,  be  modest  and  be  skilful  in  singing. 

13.  If  Dhum  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  morally  fallen,  will  indulge  in  sinful  acts, 
be  interested  in  others'  wives,  addicted  to  vices,  unkind  and  crafty. 

14.  Effects  of  Vyatipat  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  25).  If  Vyatipat  (also  known  in  short, 
as  Pat)  is  in  Tanu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  troubled  by  miseries,  be  cruel,  will  indulge  in 
destructive  acts,  be  foolish  and  will  be  disposed  to  his  relatives. 

15.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  morally  crooked,  be  bilious,  will  enjoy 
pleasures,  be  unkind,  but  grateful,  be  wicked  and  sinful. 

16.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  firm  in  disposition,  be  a  warrior,  be 
liberal,  very  rich,  dear  to  the  king  and  be  head  of  an  Army. 

17.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  relatives  etc.,  but  not 
sons  and  fortunes. 

18.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  poor,  be  charming  in  appearance,  will  have 
imbalances  of  phlegm,  bile  and  wind,  be  hard-hearted  and  shameless. 

19.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  destroy  his  enemies,  be  physically  mighty, 
skilful  in  use  of  all  kinds  of  weapons  and  in  arts  and  be  peaceful  in  disposition. 

20.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  wealth,  wife  and  sons,  will 
subdue  to  females,  be  miserable,  sensuous,  shameless  and  friendly  to  others. 

21.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  deformity  of  eyes,  be  ugly, 
unfortunate,  spiteful  to  Brahmins  and  be  troubled  by  disorders  of  blood. 

22.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  many  kinds  of  business  and  many 
friends;  he  will  be  very  learned,  well  disposed  to  his  wife  and  he  will  be  eloquent. 


23.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  religious,  peaceful,  skilful  in  religious 
acts,  very  learned  and  far-sighted. 

24.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  extremely  opulent,  be  honourable,  truthful, 
firm  in  policy,  endowed  with  many  horses  and  be  interested  in  singing. 

25.  If  Vyatipat  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  given  to  anger,  associated  with  many 
activities,  disabled,  irreligious  and  hate  his  own  relatives. 

26.  Effects  of  Paridhi  (or  Parivesh)  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  37).  If  Paridhi  is  in  Tanu 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  learned,  truthful,  peaceful,  rich,  endowed  with  sons,  pure,  charitable 
and  dear  to  elders. 

27.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wealthy,  charming,  will  enjoy  pleasures,  be 
happy,  very  religious  and  be  a  Lord. 

28.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  fond  of  his  wife,  be  very  charming,  pious, 
well  disposed  to  his  men,  be  a  servant  and  be  respectful  of  his  elders. 

29.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wonder-struck,  helpful  to  enemies  as 
well,  kind,  endowed  with  everything  and  be  skilful  in  singing. 

30.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  affluent,  virtuous,  splendourous, 
affectionate,  religious  and  dear  to  his  wife. 

31.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  famous  and  wealthy,  be  endowed  with  sons 
and  pleasures,  be  helpful  to  all  and  will  conquer  his  enemies. 

32.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  limited  number  of  children,  be  devoid 
of  happiness,  be  of  mediocre  intelligence,  very  hard-headed  and  will  have  a  sickly  wife. 

33.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  spiritually  disposed,  peaceful,  strong- 
bodied,  firm  in  decision,  religious  and  gentle. 

34.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  sons,  be  happy,  brilliant, 
very  affluent,  be  devoid  of  excessive  passion,  be  honourable  and  be  happy  with  even  a  iota. 

35.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  versed  in  arts,  will  enjoy  pleasures,  be 
strong-bodied  and  be  learned  in  all  Shastras. 

6.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  pleasures  through  women,  be  virtuous, 
intelligent,  dear  to  his  people  and  will  suffer  disorders  of  digestive  fire. 

37.  If  Paridhi  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  always  be  a  spendthrift,  be  miserable,  firm 
and  will  dishonour  elders. 

38.  Effects  of  Chap  (Indr  Dhanus,  or  Kodanda,  up  to  Sloka  49).  If  Chap  is  in  Tanu  Bhava,  the 
native  will  be  endowed  with  wealth,  grains  and  gold,  be  grateful,  agreeable  and  devoid  of  all 
actions. 


39.  If  Chap  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  speak  affably,  be  very  rich,  modest,  learned, 
charming  and  religious. 

40.  If  Chap  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  a  miser,  be  versed  in  many  arts,  will  indulge 
in  thieving,  be  devoid  of  some  limb  and  be  unfriendly. 

41.  If  Chap  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  endowed  with  quadrupeds,  wealth, 
grains  etc.,  be  honoured  by  the  king  and  be  devoid  of  sickness. 

42.  If  Chap  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  splendourous,  far-sighted,  pious,  affable  and 
will  acquire  prosperity  in  all  his  undertakings. 

43.  If  Chap  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  destroy  his  enemies,  be  happy,  affectionate,  pure 
and  will  achieve  plentifulness  in  all  his  undertakings. 

44.  If  Chap  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wealthy,  endowed  with  all  virtues,  learned 
in  Shastras,  religious  and  agreeable. 

45.  If  Chap  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  interested  in  others'  [213]  jobs,  be  cruel, 
interested  in  others'  wives  and  have  a  defective  limb. 

46.  If  Chap  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  perform  penance,  will  take  to  religious 
observations,  be  highly  learned  and  be  famous  among  men. 

47.  If  Chap  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  many  sons,  abundant  wealth, 
cows,  buffaloes  etc.  and  will  be  famous  among  men. 

48.  If  Chap  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  gain  many  treasures,  will  be  free  from  diseases, 
very  fiery  in  disposition,  affectionate  to  his  wife  and  will  have  knowledge  of  Mantras  and 
weapons. 

49.  If  Chap  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  wicked,  very  honourable,  evil  in  disposition, 
shameless,  will  go  to  other's  females  and  be  ever  poor. 

50.  Effects  of  Dhwaj  (Sikhi,  or  UpaKetu)  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  61).  If  Dhwaj  is  in 
Tanu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  skilful  in  all  branches  of  learning,  be  happy,  efficient  in 
speech,  agreeable  and  be  very  affectionate. 

51.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  a  good  and  affable  speaker,  be 
splendourous,  will  write  poetry,  be  scholarly,  honourable,  modest  and  endowed  with 
conveyances. 

52.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  miserly,  cruel  acts,  thin-bodied,  poor  and 
will  incur  severe  diseases. 

53.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  charming,  very  virtuous,  gentle,  interested 
in  Vedic  Knowledge  and  be  always  happy. 

54.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  will  enjoy  pleasures,  be  versed  in  arts, 
skilled  in  expedients,  intelligent,  eloquent  and  will  respect  elders. 


55.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  ominous  for  material  relatives,  will  win  over 
his  enemies,  be  endowed  with  many  relatives,  valiant,  splendourous  and  skilful. 

56.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  interested  in  gambling,  be  sensuous,  will 
enjoy  pleasures  and  will  befriend  prostitutes. 

57.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  interested  in  base  acts,  be  sinful, 
shameless,  will  blame  others,  will  lack  in  marital  happiness  and  will  take  other's  side. 

58.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  wear  badges,  be  delighted,  helpfully  disposed 
to  all  and  he  will  be  skilled  in  religious  deeds. 

59.  O  Brahmin,  if  Dhwaj  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  happiness  and 
fortunes,  be  fond  of  females,  be  charitable  and  will  befriend  Brahmins. 

60.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  ever  acquire  gains,  be  very  religious, 
honourable,  affluent,  fortunate,  valiant  and  skilled  in  sacrificial  rites. 

61.  If  Dhwaj  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  interested  in  sinful  acts,  be  valiant, 
untrustworthy,  unkind,  interested  in  others'  females  and  be  short-tempered. 

62.  Effects  of  Gulik  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka  73).  If  Gulik  is  in  Tanu  Bhava,  the  native 
will  be  afflicted  by  diseases,  be  lustful,  sinful,  crafty,  wicked  and  very  miserable. 

63.  If  Gulik  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  unsightly  in  appearance,  miserable,  mean, 
given  to  vices,  shameless  and  penniless. 

64.  If  Gulik  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  charming  in  appearance,  will  head  a  village, 
be  fond  of  virtuous  men  and  be  honoured  by  the  king. 

65.  If  Gulik  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  sickly,  devoid  of  happiness,  sinful  and 
afflicted  due  to  windy  and  billious  excesses. 

66.  If  Gulik  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  not  be  praise-worthy,  be  poor,  short-lived, 
spiteful,  mean,  be  a  eunuch,  be  subdued  by  his  wife  and  be  a  heterodox. 

67.  If  Gulik  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  enemies,  be  strong-bodied, 
splendourous,  liked  by  his  wife,  enthusiastic,  very  friendly  and  helpful  in  disposition. 

68.  If  Gulik  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  subdue  to  his  spouse,  be  sinful,  will  go  to 
others'  females,  be  emaciated,  devoid  of  friendship  and  will  live  on  his  wife's  wealth. 

69.  If  Gulik  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  troubled  by  hunger,  be  miserable,  cruel, 
very  much  short-tempered,  very  unkind,  poor  and  bereft  of  good  qualities. 

70.  If  Gulik  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  undergo  many  ordeals,  be  emaciated,  will 
perform  evil  acts,  be  very  unkind,  sluggish  and  be  a  talebearer. 

71.  If  Gulik  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  sons,  be  happy,  will  enjoy 
many  things,  be  fond  of  worshipping  gods  and  fire  and  will  practice  meditation  and  religion. 


72.  If  Gulik  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  enjoy  women  of  class,  be  a  leader  of  men,  be 
helpful  to  his  relatives,  be  short  stature  and  be  an  emperor. 

73.  If  Gulik  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  indulge  in  base  deeds,  be  sinful,  defective- 
limbed,  unfortunate,  indolent  and  will  join  mean  people. 

74.  Effects  of  Pranapad's  Position  with  reference  to  Lagn  and  in  Various  Bhavas  (up  to  Sloka 
85).  If  Pranapad  is  in  Tanu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  weak,  sickly,  dumb,  lunatic,  dull  witted, 
defective-limbed,  miserable  and  emaciated. 

75.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  abundant  grains,  abundant 
wealth,  abundant  attendants,  abundant  children  and  be  fortunate. 

76.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  injurious  (or  mischievous),  proud,  hard- 
hearted, very  dirty  and  be  devoid  of  respect  for  elders. 

77.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Bandhu  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  friendly,  attached  to  females 
and  elders,  soft  and  truthful. 

78.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Putr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  happy,  will  do  good  acts,  be  kind  and  very 
affectionate. 

79.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  subdued  by  his  relatives  and  enemies,  be 
sharp,  will  have  defective  digestive  fire,  be  wicked,  sickly,  affluent  and  short-lived. 

80.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Yuvati  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  green-eyed,  ever  libidinous,  fierce  in 
appearance,  be  not  worth  respect  and  be  ill-disposed. 

81.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  afflicted  by  diseases,  be  troubled  and 
will  incur  misery  on  account  of  the  king,  relatives,  servants  and  sons. 

82.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  sons,  be  very  rich, 
fortunate,  charming,  will  serve  others  and  be  not  wicked,  but  be  skilful. 

83.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  heroic,  intelligent,  skilful,  be  an  expert  in 
carrying  out  royal  orders  and  will  worship  gods. 

84  If  Pranapad  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  famous,  virtuous,  learned,  wealthy,  fair- 
complexioned  and  attached  to  mother. 

85.  If  Pranapad  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  mean,  wicked,  defective-limbed,  will 
hate  Brahmins  and  relatives  and  suffer  from  eye  diseases,  or  be  one-eyed. 

86-87.  O  Brahmin,  these  are  the  effects  for  Dhum  etc.  Before  declaring  these  results,  the 
effects  of  Surya  and  other  Grahas  should  be  wisely  conceived  by  their  positions,  relations  and 
Drishtis  apart  from  their  strength,  or  weakness. 

Ch.  26.  Evaluation  of  Drishtis  of  Grahas 


I.  O  Glorious,  it  is  said,  that  Drishtis  (of  Grahas)  and  their  strengths  are  to  be  known  in 
deciding  the  effects.  How  many  kinds  are  these?  Please  clarify  doubts. 

2-5.  Drishtis  of  the  Grahas.  O  Brahmin,  I  have  earlier  stated  Drishtis,  based  on  Rasis.  The 
other  kind  is  between  Grahas,  which  I  detail  below.  3rd  and  10th,  5th  and  9th,  4th  and  8th  and 
lastly  7th.  On  these  places  the  Drishtis  increase  gradually  in  slabs  of  quarters,  i.e  Vi,  Vi,  3A  and 
full.  The  effects  will  also  be  proportionate.  All  Grahas  give  a  Drishti  to  the  7th  fully.  Sani, 
Guru  and  Mangal  have  special  Drishtis,  respectively,  on  the  3rd  and  the  10th,  the  5th  and  the  9th 
and  the  4th  and  the  8th.  The  ancient  preceptors  have  explained  these,  which  ordinary.  By  subtle 
mathematical  calculations  these  Drishtis  will  have  to  be  clearly  understood,  as  under. 

6-8.  Evaluation  of  the  Drishtis  of  the  Grahas.  Deduct  the  longitude  of  the  Grah  (or  Bhava), 
that  receives  a  Drishti,  from  that  of  the  Grah,  which  gives  the  Drishti.  If  the  sum  exceeds  six 
Rasis,  deduct  the  sum  again  from  10  Rasis.  Convert  the  latter  sum  into  degrees  and  divide  by 
two.  The  resultant  product  is  Drishti  Kona  (or  aspectual  angle).  If  the  difference  is  in  excess 
of  5  Rasis,  ignore  the  Rasis  and  multiply  the  degrees  etc.  by  2,  which  is  the  value  of  the 
Drishti.  If  the  difference  is  in  excess  of  4  Rasis,  deduct  it  from  5  Rasis,  and  the  resultant 
degees  etc.  become  the  Drishti  value.  If  the  difference  is  in  excess  of  3  Rasis,  deduct  it  from  4 
Rasis  and  (increase  30  by)  halve  the  product  to  get  the  Drishti  value.  If  the  difference  is  above 
2  Rasis,  ignore  the  Rasis  and  add  15  to  the  degrees  etc.  to  get  the  Drishti  value.  If  it  is  in 
excess  of  one  Rasi,  ignore  the  Rasis  and  divide  the  degrees  by  2  to  get  the  Drishti  value. 

9-10.  Special  consideration  for  Sani's  Drishtis.  O  Brahmin,  if  Sani  is  the  Grah,  that  gives  a 
Drishti,  find  out  the  difference  between  him  and  the  Grah,  that  receives  the  Drishti;  if  the  sum 
is  above  1  Rasi,  multiply  the  degrees  etc.  by  2  to  get  the  Drishti  value.  If  the  sum  is  above 
nine  Rasis,  the  degrees  to  elapse  be  doubled  to  get  the  Drishti  value.  If  the  sum  is  above  2 
Rasis,  the  degrees  etc.  be  halved  and  deducted  from  60.  If  the  sum  exceeds  8  Rasis,  add  to  the 
degrees  etc.  a  figure  of  30  to  get  the  Drishti  value.  In  other  cases,  the  sums  be  processed,  as 
explained  earlier. 

II.  Special  consideration  for  Mangal's  Drishtis.  Deduct  the  longitude  of  Mangal  from  that  of 
the  Grah,  that  receives  the  Drishti.  If  the  sum  is  3  Rasis  &  c,  or  7  Rasis  &  c,  the  degrees  etc. 
be  reduced  from  60.  If  it  is  above  2  Rasis,  the  degrees  etc.  be  increased  by  half  of  it  and 
superadd  15.  If  the  sum  is  6  Rasis,  one  Rup  is  the  value. 

12.  Special  consideration  for  Guru's  Drishtis.  Deduct  the  longitude  of  Guru  from  that  of  the 
Grah,  that  receives  the  Drishti  from  Guru.  If  the  resultant  sum  is  3  Rasis  &  c,  or  7  Rasis  &  c, 
halve  the  degrees  etc.  and  increase  it  by  15.  It  the  sum  is  4  Rasis  &  c,  or  8  Rasis  &  c,  the 
degrees  etc.  be  subtracted  from  60.  This  will  be  the  Drishti  value.  The  sum,  being  in 
conformity  with  others  than  these,  be  treated,  as  stated  earlier. 


Ch.  27.  Evaluation  Of  Strengths 


Shad  Bal  consists  of  the  following:  Sthan  Bal  (positional),  Dig  Bal  (directional),  Kaal  Bal 
(Temporal),  inclusive  of  Ayan  Bal  (equinoctial),  Chesht  Bal  (motional),  Naisargika  Bal 
(natural),  Drik  Bal  (aspectual).  These  strengths  are  computed  for  the  seven  Grahas  from  Surya 
to  Sani.  The  nodes  are  not  considered. 

Sthan  Bal  comprises  of  the  following  considerations:  Uchch  Bal  (exaltation),  Sapt  Vargaj  Bal 
(strength  accruing  out  of  positions  in  Rasi,  Hora,  Dreshkan,  Saptahs,  Navahs,  Dvadashahs  and 


Trimshans),  OjhayugmaRasians  Bal  (acquired  by  placement  in  odd,  or  even  Rasi  and  in  odd, 
or  even  Navans),  Kendradi  Bal  (due  to  placement  in  Kon,  or  Panaphara,  or  Apoklima  Bhava), 
Dreshkan  Bal  (due  to  placement  in  first,  second,  or  third  decanate  of  a  Rasi). 

Kaal  Bal  comprises  of  the  following  subdivisions:  Nathonnata  Bal  (diurnal  and  nocturnal), 
Paksh  Bal  (fortnight),  Tribhag  Bal  (due  to  day/night  being  made  in  3  parts),  Varsh,  Maas, 
Dina  and  Hora  Bal  (Varsh  -  astrological  year,  Maas  -  month,  Dina  -  weekday  and  Hora  - 
planetary  hour),  Ayan  Bal  (equinoctial),  Yudhdh  Bal  (due  to  partaking  in  war  between 
Grahas). 

I-IV2.  Sthan  Bal  (up  to  Sloka  6).  Firstly  Uchch  Bal.  Now  about  the  strengths  by  classes 
positional,  temporal  etc.  Deduct  from  the  longitude  of  the  Grah  its  (deep)  debilitation  point.  If 
the  sum  is  less  than  6  Rasis,  consider  it,  as  it  is;  if  it  exceeds  6  Rasis,  deduct  the  same  from  12 
Rasis.  The  sum  so  got  be  converted  into  degrees  etc.  and  divided  by  3,  which  is  the  Grah's 
Uchch  Bal  in  Virupas. 

2-4.  Sapt  Vargaj  Bal.  If  a  Grah  is  in  its  Mooltrikon  Rasi,  it  gets  45  Virupas,  in  Svasth  Rasi  30 
Virupas,  in  Pramudit  Rasi  20  Virupas,  in  Shant  Rasi  15  Virupas,  in  Din  Rasi  10  Virupas,  in 
Duhkhit  Rasi  4  Virupas  and  in  Khal  Rasi  2  Virupas.  Similarly  these  values  occur  for  the  other 
6  divisional  occupations,  viz.  Hora,  Dreshkan,  Saptahs,  Navans,  Dvadashahs  and  Trimshans. 
When  all  these  are  added  together  the  Grah's  Sapt  Vargaj  Bal  emerges. 

4V4.  OjhayugmaRasians  Bal.  Each  of  Sukr  and  Candr  in  even  Rasis  and  others  in  odd  Rasis 
acquire  a  quarter  of  Rupa.  These  are  applicable  to  such  Navahsas  also. 

5.  Kendradi  Bal.  A  Grah  in  a  Kon  gets  full  strength,  while  one  in  Panaphara  Bhava  gets  half 
and  the  one  in  Apoklima  Bhava  gets  a  quarter,  as  Kendradi  Bal. 

6.  Dreshkan  Bal.  Male,  female  and  hermaphrodite  Grahas,  respectively,  get  a  quarter  Rupa 
according  to  placements  in  the  first,  second  and  third  decanates. 

I-IV2.  Dig  Bal.  Deduct  Bandhu  Bhava  (Nadir)  from  the  longitudes  of  Surya  and  Mangal, 
Yuvati  Bhava  from  that  of  Guru  and  Budh,  Karm  Bhava  from  that  of  Sukr  and  Candr  and 
lastly  Lagn  from  that  of  Sani.  If  the  sum  is  above  180  degrees,  deduct  the  sum  from  360.  The 
sum  arrived  in  either  way  be  divided  by  3,  which  will  be  Dig  Bal  of  the  Grah. 

8-9.  Kaal  Bal  (up  to  Sloka  17).  Firstly  Nathonnata  Bal.  Find  out  the  difference  between 
midnight  and  the  apparent  birth  time,  which  is  called  Unnata.  Deduct  Unnata  from  30  Ghatis 
to  obtain  Nata.  Double  the  Nata  in  Ghatis,  which  will  indicate  identical  Nata  Bal  for  Candr, 
Mangal  and  Sani.  Deduct  the  Nata  from  60  to  know  the  Unnata  Bal  of  Surya,  Guru  and  Sukr. 
Budh,  irrespective  of  day  and  night,  gets  full  Nathonnata  Bal. 

10-11.  Paksh  Bal.  Deduct  from  Candr's  longitude  that  of  Surya.  If  the  sum  exceeds  6  Rasis, 
deduct  the  same  from  12.  The  product  so  obtained  be  converted  into  degrees  etc.  and  divided 
by  3,  which  will  indicate  the  Paksh  Bal  of  each  of  the  benefic  Grahas.  The  Paksh  Bal  of 
benefic  should  be  deducted  from  60,  which  will  go  to  each  malefic,  as  Paksh  Bal. 

12.  Tribagh  Bal.  One  Rupa  is  obtained  by  Budh  in  the  first  1/3  part  of  day  time,  by  Surya  in 
the  second  1/3  part  of  the  day  and  by  Sani  in  the  last  1/3  part  of  the  day.  Similarly  Candr, 


Sukr  and  Mangal  get  full  Bal  in  the  first,  second  and  last  1/3  parts  of  the  night.  Guru  gets  this 
Bal  at  all  times. 

13.  Varsh-Maas-Dina-Hora  Bal.  15,  30,  45  and  60  Virupas  are  in  order  given  to  Varsh  Lord, 
Maas  Lord,  Dina  Lord  and  Hora  Lord.  Naisargika  Bal  has  already  been  explained. 

The  Varsh  Lord  is  the  Lord  of  the  day,  on  which  the  astrological  year  of  birth  starts.  To 
calculate  this  we  first  need  the  number  of  days,  past  from  the  beginning  of  Creation,  the 
Ahargan.  According  to  late  Rev.  Ebenezer  Burgess,  who  translated  Surya  Siddhanta  in 
English,  as  on  January  1,  1860,  the  number  of  days,  past  from  the  beginning  of  Creation  are 
714,404,108,573.  Divide  the  number  of  days,  past  from  the  day  of  Creation  till  the  day  of 
birth,  by  60.  Reject  remainder  and  multiply  the  quotient  by  3.  Increase  the  post-multiplied 
product  by  1  and  divide  by  7.  The  remainder  will  indicate  the  week  day,  on  which  the 
astrological  year,  giving  birth  to  the  native,  opened.  Remainder  1  indicates  Sunday,  2  Monday 
and  so  on. 

Maas  Lord.  Divide  the  same  Ahargan  by  30  and  the  quotient  indicates  months,  passed  from 
Creation  to  birth.  The  completed  months  be  multiplied  by  2  and  increased  by  1.  The  latter 
sum  should  be  divided  by  7  and  the  remainder  indicates,  on  which  day  the  birth  month  began. 
Continuing  with  the  same  case,  we  divide  65295  by  30.  Quotient  is  2176.  This  sum  multiplied 
by  2  and  increased  by  1  denotes  4353.  Dividing  4353  by  7,  we  get  a  remainder  of  6,  denoting 
Friday.  That  is,  the  month  of  birth  began  on  Friday  and  the  Maas  Bal  goes  to  Sukr,  the  Lord 
of  Friday. 

Dina  Lord.  Though  the  week  day  of  birth  can  be  known  from  ephemeris,  or  perpetual 
calendars,  we  better  adopt  the  method  prescribed,  which  will  confirm,  if  the  Ahargan 
followed  is  correct.  The  number  of  days,  as  arrived  above,  indicating  Ahargan,  be  divided  by 
7  and  the  remainder  will  indicate  the  week  day  of  birth. 

Hora  Bal.  Hora  means  planetary  hour.  Each  day  from  sunrise  to  sunrise  is  divided  into  24 
equal  parts  of  one  hour.  These  Horas  are  ruled  by  the  7  Grahas  from  Surya  to  Sani.  The  first 
Hora  of  the  day  is  ruled  by  the  Lord  of  the  week  day.  The  2nd  one  is  ruled  by  the  Lord  of  the 
6th  week  day,  counted  from  the  first  ruler.  The  3rd  Hora  is  ruled  by  the  Lord  of  the  6th  week 
day,  counted  from  the  2nd  Hora  Lord.  Similarly  it  proceeds  in  the  same  manner,  till  the  first 
Hora  of  the  next  day  is  taken  over  by  the  Lord  of  that  day  himself.  Whichever  Grah  rules  the 
birth  Hora,  gets  the  Hora  Bal.  Horas  are  to  be  calculated  for  mean  local  time  and  not  standard 
time  of  births. 

14.  Naisargika  Bal.  Divide  one  Rupa  by  7  and  multiply  the  resultant  product  by  1  to  7 
separately,  which  will  indicate  the  Naisargika  Bal,  due  to  Sani,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr, 
Candr  and  Surya,  respectively. 

15-17.  Ayan  Bal.  45,  33  and  12  are  the  Khandas  for  calculating  Ayan  Bal.  Add  Ayanahs  to 
the  Grah  and  find  out  the  Bhuja  (distance  from  the  nearest  equinox).  Add  the  figure, 
corresponding  to  the  Rasi  (of  the  Bhuja)  to  the  Bhuja.  The  degrees  etc.  of  the  Bhuja  should  be 
multiplied  by  the  figure,  corresponding  to  the  highest  of  the  left  out  Khandas  and  divided  by 
30.  Add  the  resultant  product  to  the  sum,  obtained  earlier.  Convert  this  to  Rasi,  degrees, 
minutes  and  seconds.  If  Candr  and  Sani  are  in  Tula,  or  ahead,  add  to  this  3  Rasis  and,  if  in 
Mesh  to  Kanya,  reduce  from  this  3  Rasis.  Similarly  it  is  reverse  for  Surya,  Mangal,  Sukr  and 


Guru.  For  Budh  3  Rasis  are  always  additive.  The  resultant  sum  in  Rasi,  degrees  and  minutes 
be  divided  by  3  to  get  the  Ayan  Bal  in  Rupas. 

Notes.  Ayan  Bal  can  be  found  out  on  the  following  simple  formula:  Ayan  Bal  =  60*(23°27'  + 
Kranti)/(46°54')  =  (23°27'±  Kranti)*  1.2793. 

The  following  points  have  to  be  remembered  in  respect  of  Krantis.  When  Candr,  or  Sani  have 
southern  Kranti,  or,  when  Surya,  Mangal,  Guru,  or  Sukr  have  northern  Kranti,  take  plus.  In  a 
contrary  situation  in  respect  of  these  6  Grahas,  take  minus.  As  far  as  Budh  is  concerned,  it  is 
always  plus.  Krantis  (or  declinations)  can  be  ascertained  from  a  standard  modern  ephemeris. 

Surya' s  Ayan  Bal  is  again  multiplied  by  2  whereas  for  others  the  product  arrived  in  Virupas  is 
considered,  as  it  is. 

18.  Motional  Strength  for  Surya  and  Candr.  Surya' s  Chesht  Bal  will  correspond  to  his  Ayan 
Bal.  Candr's  Paksh  Bal  will  itself  be  her  Chesht  Bal. 

19.  Drik  Bal.  Reduce  one  fourth  of  the  Drishti  Pinda,  if  a  Grah  receives  malefic  Drishtis  and 
add  a  fourth,  if  it  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic.  Super  add  the  entire  Drishti  of  Budh  and 
Guru  to  get  the  net  strength  of  a  Grah. 

20.  War  Between  Grahas.  Should  there  be  a  war  between  the  starry  Grahas,  the  difference 
between  the  Shad  Balas  of  the  two  should  be  added  to  the  victor's  Shad  Bal  and  deducted 
from  the  Shad  Bal  of  the  vanquished. 

21-23.  Motions  of  Grahas  (Mangal  to  Sani).  Eight  kinds  of  motions  are  attributed  to  Grahas. 
These  are  Vakr  (retrogression),  Anuvakr  (entering  the  previous  Rasi  in  retrograde  motion), 
Vikal  (devoid  of  motion),  Mand  (somewhat  slower  motion  than  usual),  Mandatar  (slower  than 
the  previous),  Sama  (somewhat  increasing  in  motion),  Char  (faster  than  Sama)  and  Atichar 
(entering  next  Rasi  in  accelerated  motion).  The  strengths,  allotted  due  to  such  8  motions  are 
60,  30,  15,  30,  15,  7.5,  45  and  30. 

24-25.  Motional  Strength  for  Mangal  etc.  Add  together  the  mean  and  true  longitudes  of  a 
Grah  and  divide  the  one  by  two.  Reduce  this  sum  from  the  Seeghroch  (or  apogee)  of  the  Grah. 
The  resultant  product  will  indicate  the  Chesht  Kendra  (or  Seeghr  Kendra)  of  the  Grah  from  12 
Rasis.  The  Rasi,  degrees  and  minutes  so  arrived  should  be  converted  into  degrees,  minutes 
etc.  and  divided  by  3,  which  will  denote  the  motional  strength  of  the  Grah.  Thus  there  are  six 
sources  of  strength,  called  Sthan  Bal,  Dig  Bal,  Kaal  Bal,  Drik  Bal,  Chesht  Bal  and  Naisargika 
Bal. 

26-29.  Bhava  Balas.  Thus  I  explained  about  the  strengths  of  the  Grahas.  Deduct  Yuvati  Bhava 
from  the  Bhava,  if  the  Bhava  happens  to  be  in  Kanya,  Mithun,  Tula,  Kumbh,  or  the  first  half 
ofDhanu.  If  Mesh,  Vrishabh,  Simh,  or  first  half  of  Makar,  or  the  second  half  of  Dhanu 
happen  to  be  the  Bhava,  deduct  Bandhu  Bhava  from  it.  Should  the  Bhava  be  in  Kark,  or  in 
Vrischik,  deduct  from  it  Lagn.  Deduct  Karm  Bhava  from  the  Bhava,  happening  to  fall  in 
Makar  second  half,  or  Meen.  Convert  the  product  so  obtained  into  degrees  etc.  and  divide  by 
3  to  get  Bhava  Bal.  If  the  balance  in  the  process  of  deducting  Nadir,  Meridian,  Lagn,  or 
Yuvati  exceeds  6  Rasis,  deduct  it  again  from  12  Rasis,  before  converting  into  degrees  and 
dividing  by  3.  The  product  after  division  should  be  increased  by  one  fourth,  if  the  Bhava  in 
question  receives  a  benefic  Drishti.  If  the  Bhava  receives  a  malefic  Drishti,  one  fourth  should 


be  reduced.  If  Gum,  or  Budh  give  a  Drishti  to  a  Bhava,  add  that  Grah's  Drik  Bal  also.  And 
then  superadd  the  strength,  acquired  by  the  Lord  of  that  Bhava.  This  will  be  the  net  Bhava 
Bal. 

30-31.  Special  Rules.  The  Bhavas,  occupied  by  Guru  and  Budh  will  each  get  an  addition  of  1 
Rupa,  while  each  of  the  Bhavas,  occupied  by  Sani,  Mangal  and  Surya,  suffer  1  Rupa 
reduction.  15  Virupas  will  have  to  be  added  to  the  Bhavas,  falling  in  Seershodaya  Rasis,  if 
birth  happens  to  be  in  day  time,  to  the  Bhavas,  falling  in  Dual  Rasis,  if  birth  happens  to  be  in 
twilight  and  to  the  Bhavas,  falling  in  Prishtodaya  Rasis,  if  birth  be  in  night  time. 

32-33.  Shad  Bal  Requirements.  390,  360,  300,  420,  390,  330  and  300  Virupas  are  the  Shad 
Bal  Pindas,  needed  for  Surya  etc.  to  be  considered  strong.  If  the  strength  exceeds  the  above- 
mentioned  values,  the  Grah  is  deemed  to  be  very  strong.  If  a  Grah  has  the  required  Shad  Bal, 
it  will  prove  favourable  to  the  native  by  virtue  of  its  strength.  However,  Sani's  extreme 
strength  will  give  long  life  as  well  as  miseries. 

34-36.  Guru,  Budh  and  Surya  are  strong,  if  each  of  their  Sthan  Bal,  Dig  Bal,  Kaal  Bal,  Chesht 
Bal  and  Ayan  Bal  are,  respectively,  165,  35,  50,  1 12  and  30  Virupas.  The  same  required  for 
Candr  and  Sukr  are  133,  50,  30,  100  and  40.  For  Mangal  and  Sani  these  are  96,  30,  40,  67  and 

20. 

37-38.  Bhava  Effects.  O  Brahmin,  thus  the  various  sources  of  strengths  be  gathered  together 
and  effects  declared.  Whatever  Yogas,  or  effects  have  been  stated  with  respect  to  a  Bhava, 
will  come  to  pass  through  the  strongest  Grah. 

39-40.  Eligibility  of  Issue  Fruitful  Predictions.  O  Maitreya,  the  words  of  one,  who  has 
achieved  skill  in  mathematics,  one,  who  has  put  in  industrious  efforts  in  the  branch  of 
grammar,  one,  who  has  knowledge  of  justice,  one,  who  is  intelligent,  one,  who  has  knowledge 
of  geography,  space  and  time,  one,  who  has  conquered  his  senses,  one,  who  is  skilfully  logical 
(in  estimation)  and  one,  who  is  favourable  to  Jyotish,  will  doubtless  be  truthful. 

Ch.  28.  Isht  and  Kasht  Balas 

1.  Now  I  narrate  the  benefic  and  malefic  tendencies  of  the  Grahas,  based  on  which  the  Dasha 
effects  can  be  decided. 

2.  Exaltation  Rays.  Deduct  the  Grah's  debilitation  point  from  its  actual  position.  If  the  sum 
exceeds  6  Rasis,  deduct  from  12  Rasis.  The  said  sum  should  then  be  increased  by  1  Rasi.  The 
degrees  etc.  be  multiplied  by  2,  which,  when  considered  along  with  Rasis,  will  indicate  the 
Uchch  Rasmi  of  the  Grah. 

3-4.  Chesht  Rasmi.  Chesht  Rasmis  are  to  be  calculated  from  Chesht  Kendr  similar  to  Uchch 
Rasmi  computations.  The  Chesht  Kendras  of  Grahas  from  Mangal  to  Sani  have  already  been 
explained.  Add  3  Rasis  to  Sayan  Surya  (i.e.  with  Ayanahs),  which  will  be  the  Chesht  Kendr 
for  Surya.  The  sidereal  longitude  of  Surya  should  be  deducted  from  Candr  to  get  Candr' s 
Chesht  Kendr.  If  the  Chesht  Kendr  (for  any  Grah)  is  in  excess  of  6  Rasis,  deduct  it  from  12 
Rasis.  Add  1  Rasi  and  multiply  the  degrees  etc.  by  2,  which  will  indicate  the  Chesht  Rasmi  of 
the  Grah. 


5.  Benefic  and  Malefic  Rays.  Add  the  Uchch  Rasmis  and  Chesht  Rasmis  together  and  divide 
by  two.  The  result  will  be  auspicious  rays  (Subh  Rasmis).  Deduct  from  8  the  Subh  Rasmis  to 
obtain  inauspicious  rays  (Asubh  Rasmis). 

6.  Isht  and  Kasht  Tendencies.  Reduce  1  from  each  of  Chesht  Rasmi  and  Uchch  Rasmi.  Then 
multiply  the  products  by  10  and  add  together.  Half  of  the  sum  will  represent  the  Isht  Phala 
(benefic  tendency)  of  the  Grah.  Reduce  Isht  Phala  from  60  to  obtain  the  Grah's  Kasht  Phala 
(malefic  tendency). 

7-9.  Isht  and  Kasht  and  Sapt  Varg  Phal.  60,  45,  30,  22,  15,  8,  4,  2  and  0  are  the  Subhankas 
(Subha  Griha  Pankthis,  benefic  points),  due  to  a  Grah's  placement,  respectively,  in  exaltation, 
Mooltrikon,  own,  great  friend's,  friend's,  neutral,  enemy's,  great  enemy's  and  debilitation 
Rasi.  If  Subhanka  is  deducted  from  60,  Asubhanka  (Asubh  Pankthi,  inauspicious  points)  will 
emerge.  O  Brahmin,  in  other  Vargas  these  are  halved. 

10.  A  Grah  is  considered  auspicious  in  the  first  five  of  the  said  places.  In  the  sixth  place  it  is 
neutral,  i.e.  neither  good  nor  bad.  And  in  the  other  three  places  it  is  inauspicious. 

1 1-12.  Nature  of  Effects,  due  to  Dig  Bal  etc.  The  directional  strength  of  a  Grah  is  itself 
representative  of  the  effects,  due  to  the  direction;  and  Kaal  Bal  itself  is  indicative  of  effects, 
due  to  the  day.  Whatever  quantum  of  Dig  Bal  etc.  are  obtained  by  a  Grah,  will  be  the  extent  of 
auspicious  effects,  acquirable  on  account  of  that  strength.  Deducting  those  figures  from  60, 
the  extent  of  inauspiciousness  is  known.  If  auspiciousness  is  more  in  the  case  of  a  Grah's 
strength,  the  Dasha  and  Bhavas,  related  to  that  Grah  will  be  auspicious.  These  are  converse,  if 
inauspiciousness  is  predominant. 

13-14.  Sapt  Varg  Phal  and  Isht  and  Kasht  (Continued).  The  various  strengths  (i.e.  the  other  6 
Vargas)  be  multiplied  by  the  respective  Grah's  Shad  Bal  Pinda,  which  will  indicate  the 
auspiciousness  of  the  Varg  concerned.  Auspicious,  or  inauspicious  aspect  will  be  by 
multiplying  the  Subh,  or  Asubh  Pankthi.  Similarly  auspicious,  or  inauspicious  effects  will  be 
known  by  multiplying  the  auspicious,  or  inauspicious  strength  by  the  respective  Pankthi. 

1 5-20.  Effects  of  a  Bhava.  The  strength  of  a  Bhava  and  its  Lord  have  already  been  explained. 
The  actual  effects  will  be  a  combination  of  Bhava  strength  and  its  Lord's  strength.  If  there  is  a 
benefic  in  the  Bhava  add  the  same  to  the  auspicious  effects  and  deduct  from  inauspicious 
effects,  which  will  denote  the  inauspicious  effects.  If  a  malefic  is  in  the  Bhava,  reverse  the 
process,  i.e.  add  inauspicious  effects  and  deduct  auspicious  effects.  Similarly  Drishtis  and 
Balas.  If  a  Grah  is  exalted,  or  with  such  a  dignity,  add  auspicious  effects  and  reduce 
inauspicious  effects.  For  debilitation  etc.  it  is  converse.  In  Ashtak  Varg  add  Bindus 
(auspicious  points)  and  deduct  Karanas  (inauspicious  points).  If  a  Bhava  extends  to  two  Rasis, 
the  rectification  will  be  done,  as  per  both  the  Lords.  In  that  case,  whichever  Rasi  has  more 
Bindus,  that  Rasi  will  yield  more  favourable  results,  concerning  that  Bhava.  If  both  the  Rasis 
have  more  auspicious  Bindus,  take  the  average.  Thus  the  auspicious  and  inauspicious  effects 
of  a  Bhava  be  understood. 

Ch.  29.  Bhava  Padas 

1-3.  Method  of  Bhava  Calculation.  O  Brahmin,  I  shall  now  tell  you  about  the  Padas  (Arudhas) 
for  Bhavas  and  Grahas  as  well,  as  laid  down  by  the  earlier  Maharishis.  The  Pad  of  Lagn  will 
correspond  to  the  Rasi,  arrived  at  by  counting  so  many  Rasis  from  Lagn's  Lord,  as  he  is  away 


from  Tanu  Bhava.  Similarly  Padas  for  other  Bhavas  be  known  through  their  Lords.  The  word 
"Pad"  exclusively  denotes  the  Pad  for  Lagn. 

Names  of  the  12  Arudhas  are  Lagn  Pad  -  Arudh  of  Tanu  Bhava,  Dhan  of  Dhan,  Vikram 
(Bhratru)  of  Sahaj,  Matru  (Sukh)  of  Bandhu,  Mantra  (Putr)  of  Putr,  Rog  (Satin)  of  Ari,  Dar 
(Kalatr)  of  Yuvati,  Maran  of  Randhr,  Pitru  of  Dharm  Bhava,  Karm  of  Karm,  Labh  of  Labh, 
Vyaya  of  Vyaya. 

4-5.  Special  Exceptions.  The  same  Bhava,  or  the  7th  from  it  does  not  become  its  Pad.  When 
the  Pad  falls  in  the  same  Bhava,  the  10th  therefrom  be  treated,  as  its  Pad.  Similarly,  when  the 
7th  becomes  the  Pad  of  a  Bhava,  the  4th  from  the  original  Bhava  in  question  be  treated,  as  its 
Pad.  If  the  ruler  of  a  Bhava  be  in  the  4th  from  the  Bhava,  then  the  very  Bhava  occupied  be 
noted,  as  the  Pad. 

6-7.  Padas  for  Grahas.  Note  the  position  of  a  Grah  and  see  how  many  Rasis  away  is  its  own 
Rasi  with  reference  to  its  position.  Count  so  many  Rasis  from  the  said  own  Rasi  and  the 
resultant  Rasi  will  become  the  Arudh  of  the  Grah.  If  a  Grah  owns  two  Rasis,  or,  if  a  Rasi  is 
owned  by  two  Grahas;  consider  the  stronger  and  declare  effects  accordingly. 

8-11.  Pad  and  Finance  (up  to  Sloka  1 5).  O  Brahmin,  I  now  tell  you  of  some  effects  of  Grahas, 
based  on  Pad.  If  the  1 1th  from  Lagn  Pad  is  occupied,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  Grah  the 
native  will  be  happy  and  rich;  wealth  will  come  through  various  means,  if  a  benefic  is  related, 
as  above.  A  malefic  will  confer  wealth  through  questionable  means.  If  there  be  both  a  benefic 
and  a  malefic,  it  will  be  through  both  means.  If  the  Grah  in  question  be  in  exaltation,  or  in 
own  Rasi  etc.,  there  will  be  plenty  of  gains  and  plenty  of  happiness. 

12.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  if  the  12th  from  Lagn  Pad  does  not  receive  a  Drishti,  as  the 
1 1th  from  Lagn  Pad  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  Grah,  then  the  gains  will  be  uninterrupted. 

13-15.  O  Brahmin,  the  quantum  of  gains  will  correspond  to  the  number  of  Grahas  in,  or 
giving  a  Drishti  to  the  1 1th  from  Lagn  Pad.  If  there  is  Argala  for  the  said  1 1th,  there  will  be 
more  gains,  while  a  benefic  Argala  will  bring  still  more  gains.  If  the  said  benefic,  causing 
Argala  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  the  gains  will  be  still  higher.  If  the  said  1 1th  receives  a  Drishti 
from  a  benefic  from  Lagn,  the  9th  etc.,  gains  will  increase  in  the  ascending  order.  In  all  these 
cases,  the  12th  from  Pad  should  simultaneously  be  free  from  malefic  association.  A  benefic, 
placed  in  Lagn,  giving  a  Drishti  to  the  1 1th  from  Arudh  Lagn  will  be  still  beneficial.  If  the 
Drishti  is  from  the  9X  from  Lagn,  it  will  confer  much  more  gains. 

16-17.  Pad  and  Financial  Losses  (up  to  Sloka  21).  If  the  12th  from  Lagn  Pad  receives  a  Drishti 
from,  or  is  yuti  with  both  benefics  and  malefics,  there  will  be  abundant  earnings,  but  plenty  of 
expenses.  The  benefic  will  cause  through  fair  means,  malefic  through  unfair  means  and  mixed 
Grahas  through  both  fair  and  unfair  means. 

18.  If  the  12th  from  Lagn  Pad  is  conjunct  Surya,  Sukr  and  Rahu,  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth 
through  the  king.  Candr,  giving  a  Drishti  to  (the  said  trio  in  the  said  Bhava),  will  specifically 
cause  more  such  losses. 

19.  If  Budh  is  in  the  12th  from  Lagn  Pad  and  is  yuti  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic, 
similarly  there  will  be  expenses  through  paternal  relatives.  A  malefic  so  related  to  the  said 
Budh  will  cause  loss  of  wealth  through  disputes. 


20.  O  Brahmin,  if  Guru  is  in  the  12*  from  Lagn  Pad,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  others,  the 
expenses  will  be  through  taxes  and  on  the  person  himself. 

21.  O  Brahmin,  if  Sani  is  in  the  12th  from  Lagn  Pad  along  with  Mangal  and  receives  a  Drishti 
from  others,  the  expenses  will  be  through  one's  co-born. 

22.  Gainful  Sources.  Whatever  sources  of  expenses  are  indicated  above  with  reference  to  the 
12th  from  Lagn  Pad,  gains  through  similar  sources  will  occur,  if  Labh  Bhava  so  features  with 
reference  to  Lagn  Pad. 

23.  The  7th  Bhava  from  Pad  (up  to  Sloka  27).  If  Rahu,  or  Ketu  is  placed  in  the  7th  from  Lagn 
Pad,  the  native  will  be  troubled  by  disorders  of  the  stomach,  or  by  fire. 

24.  Should  there  be  Ketu  in  the  7th  from  Lagn  Pad,  receiving  a  Drishti  from,  or  being  yuti  with 
another  malefic,  the  native  will  be  adventurous,  will  have  (prematurely)  grey  hair  and  a  big 
male  organ. 

25.  Should  one,  two,  or  all  three  of  Guru,  Sukr  and  Candr  be  in  the  7th  from  Lagn  Pad,  the 
native  will  be  very  wealthy. 

26.  Whether  a  benefic,  or  a  malefic,  if  be  exalted  in  the  7th  from  Lagn  Pad,  the  native  will  be 
affluent  and  be  famous. 

27.  O  Brahmin,  these  Yogas,  as  narrated  by  me  with  reference  to  the  7th  from  Lagn  Pad, 
should  also  be  considered  from  the  2nd  of  Lagn  Pad. 

28.  Anyone  of  Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr  being  exalted  in  the  2nd  from  Lagn  Pad  and  being  with 
strength  will  make  the  subject  rich. 

29.  The  Yogas  so  far  stated  by  me  with  reference  to  Lagn  Pad  be  similarly  evaluated  from 
Karakahs  as  well. 

30-37.  General.  If  Budh  is  in  the  2n  from  Arudh  Lagn,  the  native  will  Lord  over  the  whole 
country.  Sukr  in  the  2nd  from  Lagn  Pad  will  make  one  a  poet,  or  a  speaker.  If  the  Dar  Pad  falls 
in  an  angle,  or  in  a  trine,  counted  from  Lagn  Pad,  or,  if  Lagn  Pad  and  Dar  Pad  both  have 
strong  Grahas,  the  native  will  be  rich  and  be  famous  in  his  country.  If  the  Dar  Pad  falls  in  the 
6th/  8th/12th  from  Lagn  Pad,  then  the  native  will  be  poor.  If  Lagn  Pad  and  the  7th  therefrom,  or 
an  angle,  a  trine,  an  Upachaya  therefrom  is  occupied  by  a  strong  Grah,  there  will  be  happiness 
between  the  husband  and  wife.  If  Lagn  Pad  and  Dar  Pad  are  mutually  in  Kendras,  or  Konas, 
there  will  be  amity  between  the  couple.  If  these  be  in  mutually  6th/8th/12th,  doubtlessly  mutual 
enmity  will  crop  up.  O  Brahmin,  similarly  mutual  relationship,  or  gain,  or  loss  through  son 
etc.  be  known,  based  on  Lagn  Pad  and  the  relative  Bhava  Pad.  If  Lagn  Pad  and  Dar  Pad  are 
mutually  angular,  or  3rd  and  1 1th,  or  in  Konas,  the  native  will  be  a  king,  ruling  the  earth. 
Similar  deductions  be  made  with  reference  to  mutual  positions  of  Lagn  Pad  and  Dhan  Pad. 

Ch.  30.  Upa  Pad 

1-6.  O  Brahmin,  now  I  tell  you  about  Upa  Pad,  the  auspiciousness  of  which  will  confer  on  the 
native  happiness  from  progeny,  wife  etc.  The  Pad  of  Lagn,  as  discussed  earlier,  is  of  prime 
importance.  Upa  Pad  is  calculated  for  the  Bhava,  following  the  natal  Lagn.  This  Upa  Pad  is 


also  called  Gaun  Pad.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  if  Upa  Pad  is  yuti  with,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  a  benefic  Grah,  one  will  obtain  full  happiness  from  progeny  and  spouse.  Should 
the  Upa  Pad  be  in  a  malefic' s  Rasi,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  yuti  with  a  malefic,  one 
will  become  an  ascetic  and  go  without  a  wife.  If  (in  the  said  circumstances)  there  be  a  benefic 
Drishti  (on  Upa  Pad,  or  the  related  malefic),  or  a  yuti,  deprival  of  spouse  will  not  come  to 
pass.  In  this  case  Surya,  being  exalted,  or  in  a  friendly  Rasi,  is  not  a  malefic.  He  is  a  malefic, 
if  in  debilitation,  or  in  an  enemy's  Rasi. 

Notes.  Regarding  Upa  Pad  calculations,  there  are  more  than  two  views  on  the  same  Sloka  of 
Maharishi  Parashar,  or  an  identical  Sutra  from  Jaimini.  In  this  text,  the  word  '  Anuchar'  is 
used,  which  denotes  'the  Bhava,  following  the  Lagn  at  birth'.  Normally  this  is  Vyaya  Bhava. 
However,  when  we  study  other  commentaries  on  Jaimini  (Chaukhambh  Hindi  edition),  we  are 
taught,  that  it  is  Vyaya  Bhava  in  the  case  of  an  odd  Rasi  ascending  and  it  is  Dhan  Bhava  in  the 
case  of  an  even  Rasi  ascending.  Accordingly  the  Pad  for  the  12th,  or  the  2nd  from  Lagn  is 
called  Upa  Pad.  In  calculating  Upa  Pad  the  rules  mentioned  in  verses  4  and  5  of  the  previous 
chapter  be  kept  in  mind. 

7-12.  Effect  from  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad.  If  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad  is  a  benefic  Rasi,  or  receives 
a  Drishti  from,  or  is  yuti  with  a  benefic,  the  same  good  results  (as  for  wife  and  sons)  will 
come  to  pass.  If  there  is  a  Grah  in  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad  in  its  debilitation  Rasi,  or  debilitation 
Ahs,  or  is  yuti  with  a  debilitated,  or  malefic  Grah,  there  will  be  destruction  of  wife.  If  the  said 
occupant  be  in  its  exaltation  Rasi,  or  Navahs,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  another  Grah,  there 
will  be  many  charming  and  virtuous  wives.  Oh  Brahmin,  if  Mithun  happens  to  be  the  2nd  from 
Upa  Pad,  then  also  there  will  be  many  wives.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  if  the  Upa  Pad,  or 
the  2nd  therefrom  be  occupied  by  its  own  Lord,  or,  if  the  said  Lord  is  in  his  other  own  Bhava, 
the  death  of  wife  will  be  at  advanced  age. 

13-15.  Wife  from  the  2nd  of  Upa  Pad  (up  to  Sloka  22).  If  a  Grah  being  constant  indicator  of 
wife  (i.e.  the  7th  Lord,  or  Sukr)  is  in  its  own  Bhava,  there  will  be  loss  of  wife  only  at  a  later 


stage.  If  the  Lord  of  Upa  Pad,  or  the  constant  significator  of  wife  is  in  exaltation,  the  wife  will 
be  from  a  noble  family.  Reverse  will  be  the  case,  if  he  is  debilitated.  O  Brahmin,  if  the  2nd 
from  Upa  Pad  is  related  to  a  benefic,  the  wife  will  be  beautiful,  fortunate  and  virtuous. 


16.  Should  Sani  and  Rahu  be  in  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad,  the  native  will  lose  his  wife  on  account 
of  calumny,  or  through  death. 

17.  The  native's  wife  will  be  troubled  by  disorder  of  blood,  leucorrhoea  (Pradar)  etc.,  if  Sukr 
and  Ketu  are  in  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad. 

18.  Budh  with  Ketu  in  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad  will  cause  breakage  of  bones,  while  Rahu,  Sani 
and  Surya  will  cause  distress  of  bones. 

19-22.  Budh  and  Rahu  in  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad  will  give  a  stout-bodied  wife.  If  the  2nd  from 
Upa  Pad  happens  to  be  one  of  Budh' s  Rasis  and  is  tenanted  by  Mangal  and  Sani,  the  wife  of 
the  native  will  suffer  from  nasal  disorders.  Similarly  a  Rasi  of  Mangal,  becoming  the  2nd  from 
Upa  Pad  and  occupied  by  Mangal  and  Sani,  will  cause  nasal  disorders  to  one's  wife.  Guru  and 
Sani  will,  if  be  in  the  2n  from  Upa  Pad,  cause  disorders  of  ears  and/or  eyes  to  the  wife.  If 
Budh  and  Mangal  are  placed  in  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad  other  than  their  own  Rasis,  or,  if  Rahu  is 
with  Guru  in  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad,  the  native's  wife  will  suffer  from  dental  disorders.  Sani 
and  Rahu  together  in  one  of  Sani's  Rasis,  which  is  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad,  will  cause  lameness, 


or  windy  disorders  to  the  native's  wife.  These  evils  will  not  come  to  pass,  if  there  happens  to 
be  a  Yuti  with,  or  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic  (or  from  another  benefic  in  the  case  of  affliction 
being  caused  by  a  benefic  himself). 

23-23V2.  O  Brahmin,  all  these  effects  be  deduced  from  the  natal  Lagn,  Lagn  Pad,  the  7th  from 
Upa  Pad  and  the  Lords  thereof.  So  say  Narada  and  others. 

25-28.  About  Sons.  If  Sani,  Candr  and  Budh  are  together  in  the  9th  from  one  of  the  said  places 
(Sloka  23),  there  will  be  no  son  at  all,  while  Surya,  Guru  and  Rahu  so  placed  will  give  a 
number  of  sons.  Candr  so  placed  will  give  a  son,  while  a  mixture  of  Grahas  will  delay  the 
obtainment  of  a  son.  The  son,  caused  by  the  Yuti  of  Surya,  Guru  and  Rahu,  will  be  strong, 
valorous,  greatly  successful  and  will  destroy  enemies.  If  Mangal  and  Sani  are  in  the  said  9th, 
there  will  be  no  son,  or  a  son  will  be  obtained  by  adoption,  or  brother's  son  will  come  in 
adoption.  In  all  these  cases  odd  Rasis  will  yield  many  sons,  while  even  Rasis  will  cause  only  a 
few. 

29-30.  Many  Sons  and  Many  Daughters.  O  Brahmin,  if  Simh  happens  to  be  Upa  Pad  and 
receives  a  Drishti  from  Candr,  there  will  be  a  limited  number  of  children.  Similarly  Kanya 
will  cause  many  daughters. 

3 1 .  Co-born  form  Lagn  Pad  (up  to  Sloka  36).  Rahu  and  Sani  in  the  3rd,  or  the  1 1th  from  Lagn 
Pad  will  destroy  the  co-born  of  the  native.  Rahu  and  Sani  in  the  1 1th  will  indicate  the 
destruction  of  elder  brothers  and/or  sisters  and  in  the  3rd  younger  ones. 

32.  If  Sukr  is  in  the  3rd,  or  the  1 1th  from  Lagn  Pad,  there  would  have  been  an  abortion  to  the 
mother  earlier.  Same  is  the  effect,  if  Sukr  is  in  the  8th  from  natal  Lagn,  or  from  Lagn  Pad. 

33-36.  These  are  the  effects,  o  Brahmin,  as  stated  by  Maharishis  for  the  3rd  and  the  1 1th  from 
Lagn  Pad.  Should  Candr,  Guru,  Budh  and  Mangal  be  in  the  3rd,  or  the  1 1th  from  Lagn  Pad, 
there  will  be  many  valorous  co-born.  Should  Sani  and  Mangal  be  in  the  3rd,  or  the  1 1th  from 
Lagn  Pad,  or  give  Drishtis  thereto,  younger  and  elder  co-born  will,  respectively,  be  destroyed. 
If  Sani  is  alone  in  one  of  the  said  Bhavas,  the  native  will  be  spared,  while  the  co-born  will  die. 
Ketu  in  the  3rd,  or  the  1 1th  will  give  abundant  happiness  from  one's  sisters. 

37.  Other  Matters  from  Lagn  Pad  (up  to  Sloka  43).  If  the  6th  from  Lagn  Pad  is  occupied  by  a 
malefic  and  is  bereft  of  a  Yuti  with,  or  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  the  native  will  be  a  thief. 

38.  If  Rahu  is  in  the  7th,  or  the  12th  from  Lagn  Pad,  or  gives  a  Drishti  to  one  of  the  said 
Bhavas,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  spiritual  knowledge  and  be  very  fortunate. 

39.  If  Budh  is  in  Lagn  Pad,  the  native  will  Lord  over  a  whole  country,  while  Guru  will  make 
him  a  knower  of  all  things.  Sukr  in  this  context  denotes  a  poet/speaker  (also  see  Ch.  29,  verse 
30). 

40.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  if  benefics  occupy  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad,  or  from  Lagn  Pad, 
the  native  will  be  endowed  with  all  kinds  of  wealth  and  be  intelligent. 

41.  One  will  surely  become  a  thief,  if  the  Lord  of  the  2nd  from  Upa  Pad  is  in  Dhan  Bhava  and 
is  there  yuti  with  a  malefic  Grah. 


42-43.  O  Brahmin,  if  Rahu  is  in  the  2nd  from  the  Lord  of  the  7th,  counted  from  Upa  Pad,  the 
native  will  have  long  and  projected  teeth.  Ketu  in  the  2nd  from  the  Lord  of  the  7th,  counted 
from  Upa  Pad,  will  cause  stammering  and  Sani  in  the  2nd  from  the  Lord  of  the  7th,  counted 
from  Upa  Pad,  will  make  one  look  ugly.  Mixed  will  be  the  effects,  if  there  are  mixed  Grahas. 

Ch.  31.  Argala,  or  Intervention  from  Grahas 

1.  O  Maharishi  Parashar,  you  have  told  of  auspicious  effects,  related  to  Argala.  Kindly  narrate 
its  conditions  and  effects. 

2-9.  Formation  of  Argala.  Maitreya,  I  explain  below  Argala  to  know  the  definite  effects  of 
Bhavas  and  Grahas.  Grahas  in  the  4th,  2n  and  the  1 1th  cause  Argalas,  while  obstructors  of  the 
Argala  will  be  those  in  the  10th,  12th  and  3rd  from  a  Bhava,  or  a  Grah.  If  the  Argala  causing 
Grah  is  stronger  than  the  obstructing  one,  the  former  will  prevail.  Or,  if  the  number  of  Argalas 
are  more  than  the  obstructing  Grahas,  then  also  the  Argala  will  prevail.  If  there  are  3,  or  more 
malefics  in  the  3rd  they  will  cause  Vipreet  Argala  (more  effective  intervention),  which  will 
also  be  harmless  and  be  very  favourable.  The  5th  is  also  an  Argala  place,  while  the  Grah  in  the 
9th  will  counteract  such  Argala.  As  Rahu  and  Ketu  have  retrograde  motions,  the  Argalas  and 
obstructions  be  also  counted  accordingly  in  a  reverse  manner.  Maharishis  say,  that  the  Argala, 
caused  by  one  Grah,  will  yield  limited  effect,  by  two  medium  and  by  more  than  two,  excellent 
effects.  Argalas  should  be  counted  from  a  Rasi,  or  a  Grah,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  Argala, 
which  is  unobstructed  will  be  fruitful,  while  the  one  duly  obstructed  will  go  astray.  The 
Argala  effects  will  be  derived  in  the  Dasha  periods  of  the  Rasi,  or  Grah  concerned. 

Notes.  'Argala'  in  Sanskrit  is  figuratively  used  to  denote  an  impediment,  or  obstruction.  Some 
suggest,  that  the  Argala  obstruction  places  are  countable  from  the  Argala  place  instead  of 
from  the  original  place,  or  Grah.  This  is  not  logical  and  a  glance  into  Gochar  Vedha 
(obstructions  during  transits)  will  confirm  our  findings. 

10.  Special.  The  Argala,  caused  by  placement  of  a  Grah  in  the  first  one  fourth  part  of  the  Rasi, 
is  countered  by  another,  placed  in  the  4th  quarter  of  the  respective  obstructive  Rasi.  Similarly 
2nd  quarter's  Argala  is  eliminated  by  the  3rd  quarter  placement  of  another  Grah. 

Notes.  If  the  Argala  causing  Grah  and  the  obstructing  Grah  are  in  the  respective  quarters,  the 
obstruction  will  come  to  pass.  Otherwise  not. 

11-17.  Argala  Effects.  Should  there  be  Argala  for  the  Arudh  Pad,  for  the  natal  Lagn  and  for 
the  7th  from  both,  the  native  will  be  famous  and  fortunate.  A  malefic,  or  a  benefic,  causing 
unobstructed  Argala,  giving  a  Drishti  to  Lagn  will  make  one  famous.  Similarly  a  malefic,  or  a 
benefic,  causing  unobstructed  Argala,  giving  a  Drishti  to  Dhan  Bhava  denotes  acquisition  of 
wealth  and  grains,  to  Sahaj  Bhava  happiness  from  co-born,  to  Bandhu  Bhava  residences, 
quadrupeds  and  relatives,  to  Putr  Bhava  sons,  grand  sons  and  intelligence,  to  Ari  Bhava  fear 
from  enemies,  to  Yuvati  Bhava  abundant  wealth  and  marital  happiness,  to  Randhr  Bhava 
difficulties,  to  Dharm  Bhava  fortunes,  to  Karm  Bhava  royal  honour,  to  Labh  Bhava  gains  and 
to  Vyaya  Bhava  expenses.  The  Argala  by  benefics  will  give  various  kinds  of  happiness,  while 
benefic  effects  will  be  meddling  with  malefic  Argalas.  Argala  by  both  benefics  and  malefics 
will  yield  results. 

Notes.  1.  Argala  can  be  caused  by  a  benefic,  which  is  known,  as  Subh  Argala.  This  Argala 
can  be  from  a  malefic  also,  so  that  the  benefic,  causing  Argala,  stalls  the  malefic  role.  If  the 


benefic's  Argala  is  obstructed  by  another,  then  the  benefic  will  become  ineffective  in  Argala 
and  the  first-mentioned  malefic  will  operate  freely. 

2.  Argala  can  be  by  a  malefic  with  reference  to  a  benefic,  so  that  the  native  does  not  enjoy 
good  effects,  due  to  the  benefic.  This  is  Pap  (malefic)  Argala.  If  the  Argala  is  eliminated  by  a 
benefic,  or  a  malefic,  then  the  first  mentioned  benefic  will  be  at  liberty  to  act,  according  to  his 
own  disposition. 

18.  Should  there  be  (unobstructed)  Argala  for  Lagn,  Putr  and  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will 
doubtlessly  become  a  king  and  fortunate. 

Ch.  32.  Karakatwas  of  the  Grahas 

1-2. 1  now  detail  below  Atma  Karak  etc.,  obtainable  from  among  the  7  Grahas,  viz.  Surya  to 
Sani.  Some  say,  that  Rahu  will  become  a  Karak,  when  there  is  a  state  of  similarity  in  terms  of 
longitude  between  (two)  Grahas.  Yet  some  say,  that  the  8  Grahas,  including  Rahu,  will  have 
to  be  considered  irrespective  of  such  a  state. 

3-8.  Atma  Karak  Defined.  Among  the  Grahas  from  Surya  etc.  whichever  has  traversed 
maximum  number  of  degrees  in  a  particular  Rasi  is  called  Atma  Karak.  If  the  degrees  are 
identical,  then  the  one  with  more  minutes  of  arc  and,  if  the  minutes  are  also  identical,  then  the 
one  with  higher  seconds  of  arc,  have  to  be  considered.  In  that  case  these  three  are  called 
Anthya  Karak,  Madhya  Karak  and  Upakheta.  In  the  case  of  Rahu  deduct  his  longitude  in  that 
particular  Rasi  from  30.  The  Karakas  will  have  to  be  decided,  as  above  and,  as  per  further 
rules  given  below.  Out  of  these  Karakas,  Atma  Karak  is  the  most  important  and  has  a  prime 
say  on  the  native,  just  as  the  king  is  the  most  famous  among  the  men  of  his  country  and  is  the 
head  of  all  affairs  and  is  entitled  to  arrest  and  release  men. 

9-12.  Importance  of  Atma  Karak.  O  Brahmin,  as  the  minister  cannot  go  against  the  king,  the 
other  Karakas,  viz.  Putr  Karak,  Amatya  Karak  etc.  cannot  predominate  over  Atma  Karak  in 
the  affairs  of  the  native.  If  the  Atma  Karak  is  adverse,  other  Karakas  cannot  give  their  benefic 
effects.  Similarly,  if  Atma  Karak  is  favourable,  other  Karakas  cannot  predominate  with  their 
malefic  influences. 

13-17.  Other  Karakas.  The  Grah  next  to  Atma  Karak  in  terms  of  longitude  is  called  Amatya 
Karak.  Similarly  following  one  another  in  terms  of  longitude  are  Bhratru  Karak,  Matru  Karak, 
Pitru  Karak,  Putr  Karak,  Gnati  Karak  and  Stri  Karak.  These  are  Char  Karakas,  or  inconstant 
significators.  Some  consider  Matru  Karak  and  Putr  Karak,  as  identical.  If  two  Grahas  have  the 
same  longitude,  both  become  the  same  Karak,  in  which  case  there  will  be  a  deficit  of  one 
Karak.  In  that  circumstance  consider  constant  significator  in  the  context  of  benefic/malefic 
influence  for  the  concerned  relative. 

18-21.  Constant  Karakatwas.  I  narrate  below  the  constant  Karakatwas,  as  related  to  the 
Grahas.  The  stronger  among  Surya  and  Sukr  indicates  the  father,  while  the  stronger  among 
Candr  and  Mangal  indicates  the  mother.  Mangal  denotes  sister,  brother-in-law,  younger 
brother  and  mother.  Budh  rules  maternal  relative,  while  Guru  indicates  paternal  grand  father. 
Husband  and  sons  are,  respectively,  denoted  by  Sukr  and  Sani.  From  Ketu  note  wife,  father, 
mother,  parents-in  law  and  maternal  grand  father.  These  are  constant  Karakatwas. 


22-24.  Bhavas  Related.  These  constant  significances  are  derivable  from  the  Bhavas,  counted 
from  the  said  constant  Karakatwas.  The  9th  from  Surya  denotes  father,  the  4th  from  Candr 
mother,  the  3r  from  Mangal  brothers,  the  6*  from  Budh  maternal  uncle,  the  5l  from  Guru 
sons,  the  7th  from  Sukr  wife  and  the  8th  from  Sani  death.  The  learned  should  consider  all  these 
and  declare  related  effects  accordingly. 

25-30.  Yog  Karakas.  O  Brahmin,  I  make  below  a  passing  reference  to  Yog  Karakas  (mutual 
co-workers).  Grahas  become  Yog  Karakas,  if  they  are  in  mutual  angles  identical  with  own 
Rasis,  exaltation  Rasis,  or  friendly  Rasis.  In  Karm  Bhava  a  Grah  will  be  significantly  so. 
Grahas  simply  (not  being  in  friendly,  own,  or  exaltation  Rasis)  in  Lagn,  Bandhu  and  Yuvati 
Bhava  do  not  become  such  Yog  Karakas.  Even,  if  they  be  placed  in  other  Bhavas,  but  with 
such  dignities,  as  mentioned,  shall  become  Yog  Karakas.  With  such  Grahas  even  a  person  of 
mean  birth  will  become  a  king  and  be  affluent.  One  born  of  royal  scion,  then  will  surely 
become  a  king.  Thus  the  effects  be  declared,  considering  the  number  of  such  Grahas  and  the 
order  the  native  belongs  to. 

31-34.  Bhava  Significance.  I  now  narrate  the  significance  of  the  Bhavas.  Tanu  Bhava  denotes 
the  soul  (self),  Dhan  family,  finance,  wife  etc.,  Sahaj  younger  brothers/sisters,  Putr  progeny 
and  Yuvati  wife.  It  is  also  said,  that  a  Grah  in  Putr  becomes  a  Karak  for  wife.  The  Karakatwas 
of  the  Bhava  in  order  are  Surya,  Guru,  Mangal,  Candr,  Guru,  Mangal,  Sukr,  Sani,  Guru, 
Budh,  Guru  and  Sani. 

35-37.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  after  knowing  the  merits  of  Tanu  Bhava  etc.  the  good  and 
bad  effects  can  be  declared.  Ari,  Randhr  and  Vyaya  are  Trikas,  Dusthan,  or  malefic  Bhavas. 
Sahaj,  Ari,  Karm  and  Labh  are  Upachayas.  Dhan,  Putr,  Randhr  and  Labh  are  Panapharas  and 
Sahaj,  Ari,  Dharm  and  Vyaya  are  Apoklimas.  Association  with  Trikas  will  inflict  evils. 
Kendras  and  Konas  (Putr  and  Dharm)  are  auspicious  Bhavas,  the  association  with  which  turns 
even  evil  into  auspiciousness. 

(Also  see  Ch.  34  for  more  information) 

Ch.  33.  Effects  of  Karakans 

1.  O  Brahmin,  as  laid  down  by  Lord  Brahma,  I  now  tell  you  about  the  effects  of  Karakans 
identical  with  Mesh  etc.  (Karakans  is  the  Navahs,  occupied  by  the  Atma  Karak  Grah) 

2-8.  Karakans  in  Various  Rasis.  If  Atma  Karak  happens  to  be  in  Mesh  Navahs,  there  will  be 
nuisance  from  rats  and  cats  at  all  times.  A  malefic  joining  will  further  increase  the  nuisance. 
Should  Atma  Karak  be  in  Vrishabh  Navahs,  happiness  from  quadrupeds  will  result.  Should 
Atma  Karak  be  in  Mithun  Navahs,  the  native  will  be  afflicted  by  itch  etc.  Should  Atma  Karak 
be  in  Kark  Navahs,  there  will  be  fear  from  water  etc.  If  Atma  Karak  happens  to  be  in  Simh 
Navahs,  fear  will  be  from  tiger  etc.  If  Atma  Karak  happens  to  be  in  Kanya  Navahs,  itch, 
corpulence,  fire  etc.  will  cause  trouble,  while,  if  Atma  Karak  is  in  Tula  Navahs,  he  will  make 
one  a  trader  and  skilful  in  making  robes  etc.  Vrischik  Navahs,  holding  Atma  Karak,  will  bring 
troubles  from  snakes  etc.  and  also  affliction  to  mother's  breasts.  There  will  be  falls  from 
height  and  conveyances  etc.,  if  it  is  Dhanu  Navahs,  that  is  occupied  by  Atma  Karak.  Makar 
Navahs  in  this  respect  denotes  gains  from  water  dwelling  beings  and  conch,  pearl,  coral  etc.  If 
it  is  Kumbh  Navahs,  holding  Atma  Karak,  the  native  will  construct  tanks  etc.  And  in  Meen 
Navahs  the  Atma  Karak  will  grant  final  emancipation.  The  Drishti  of  a  benefic  will  remove 
evils,  while  that  of  a  malefic  will  cause  no  good. 


9-11.  O  Brahmin,  if  there  be  only  benefics  in  Karakahs  and  the  Navahs  of  Lagn  receives  a 
Drishti  from  a  benefic,  the  native  will  undoubtedly  become  a  king.  Should  the  Kendras/Konas 
from  the  Karakahs  be  occupied  by  benefics,  devoid  of  malefic  association,  the  native  will  be 
endowed  with  wealth  and  learning.  The  combination  of  benefic  and  malefic  influence  will  in 
this  context  yield  mixed  results.  If  the  Upakheta  (UpaGrah,  vide  Ch.32  Sloka  5)  is  in  its 
exaltation,  or  own,  or  friendly  Rasi  and  is  devoid  of  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  the  native  will 
go  to  heaven  after  death. 

12.  If  the  Atma  Karak  is  in  the  divisions  of  Candr,  Mangal,  or  Sukr,  the  native  will  go  to 
others  wives.  Otherwise  the  contrary  will  prevail. 

13-18.  Effects  of  Grahas  in  the  Karakahs.  O  Brahmin,  if  Surya  is  in  the  Karakahs,  the  native 
will  be  engaged  in  royal  assignments.  If  the  full  Candr  is  there,  he  will  enjoy  pleasures  and  be 
a  scholar,  more  so,  if  Sukr  gives  a  Drishti  to  the  Karakahs.  If  strong  Mangal  is  in  Karakahs,  he 
will  use  the  weapon  spear,  will  live  through  fire  and  be  an  alchemist.  Should  strong  Budh  be 
Karakahs,  he  will  be  skilful  in  arts  and  trading,  be  intelligent  and  educated.  Guru  in  Karakahs 
denotes  one,  doing  good  acts,  endowed  with  spiritualism  and  Vedic  learning.  One  will  be 
endowed  with  a  longevity  of  100  years,  be  sensuous  and  will  look  after  state  affairs,  if  Sukr  is 
in  Karakahs.  Sani  in  Karakahs  will  give  such  livelihood,  as  due  to  the  natives  family.  Rahu  in 
Karakahs  denotes  a  thief,  a  bowman,  a  machinery  maker  and  a  doctor,  treating  poisonous 
afflictions.  If  Ketu  be  in  Karakahs,  one  will  deal  in  elephants  and  be  a  thief. 

19-22.  Rahu-Surya  in  Karakahs.  Should  Rahu  and  Surya  be  in  Karakahs,  there  will  be  fear 
from  snakes.  If  a  benefic  gives  a  Drishti  to  Rahu-Surya  in  Karakahs,  there  will  be  no  fear,  but 
a  malefic  Drishti  will  bring  death  (through  serpents).  If  Rahu  and  Surya  occupy  benefic  Shad 
Vargas,  being  in  Karakahs,  one  will  be  a  doctor,  treating  poisonous  afflictions,  while  the 
Drishti  from  Mangal  on  Rahu-Surya  in  Karakahs  denotes,  that  the  native  will  burn  either  his 
own  house,  or  that  of  others.  Budh's  Drishti  on  Rahu-Surya  in  Karakahs  will  not  cause  the 
burning  of  one's  own  house,  but  that  of  others.  If  Rahu  and  Surya  happen  to  be  in  Karakahs 
and  are  in  a  malefic' s  Rasi,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Guru,  one  will  burn  a  house  in  one's 
neighbourhood,  while  the  Drishti  of  Sukr  will  not  cause  such  an  event. 

23-24.  Gulik  in  Karakahs.  Should  the  full  Candr  give  a  Drishti  to  Gulik,  placed  in  the 
Karakahs,  the  native  will  lose  his  wealth  to  thieves,  or  will  himself  be  a  thief.  If  Gulik  is  in 
Karakahs,  but  does  not  receive  a  Drishti  from  others,  one  will  administer  poison  to  others,  or 
will  himself  die  of  poisoning.  Budh's  Drishti  in  this  context  will  give  large  testicles. 

25-29.  Effects  of  Drishtis  on  Ketu  in  Karakahs.  If  Ketu  is  in  Karakahs,  receiving  a  Drishti 
from  a  malefic,  ones  ears  will  be  severed,  or  one  will  suffer  from  diseases  of  the  ears.  Sukr, 
giving  a  Drishti  to  Ketu  in  Karakahs,  denotes  one,  initiated  into  religious  order.  One  will  be 
devoid  of  strength,  if  Budh  and  Sani  give  a  Drishti  to  Ketu  in  Karakahs.  If  Budh  and  Sukr 
give  a  Drishti  to  Ketu  in  Karakahs,  one  will  be  the  son  of  a  female  slave,  or  of  a  female 
remarried.  With  Sani's  Drishti  on  Ketu  in  Karakahs  one  will  perform  penance,  or  be  a  servant, 
or  will  be  a  pseudo-ascetic.  Sukr  and  Surya  together,  giving  a  Drishti  to  Ketu  in  Karakahs, 
will  make  one  serve  the  king.  Thus,  o  Brahmin,  are  told  briefly  the  effects  of  Karakahs. 

30-3 1 .  Effects  of  the  2n  from  Karakahs.  If  the  2n  from  Karakahs  falls  in  the  divisions  of 
Sukr,  or  Mangal,  one  will  be  addicted  to  others'  wives  and,  if  Sukr,  or  Mangal  give  a  Drishti 
to  the  2nd  from  Karakahs,  the  tendency  will  last  till  death.  If  Ketu  is  the  2nd  from  Karakahs  in  a 


division  of  Sukr,  or  Mangal,  addiction  to  other's  wives  will  not  prevail,  while  the  position  of 
Guru  will  cause  such  an  evil.  Rahu  in  the  2nd  from  Karakahs  will  destroy  wealth. 

32.  Effects  of  the  3r  from  Karakahs.  A  malefic  in  the  3r  from  Karakahs  will  make  one 
valorous,  while  a  benefic  in  the  3rd  from  Karakahs  will  make  one  timid. 

33-35.  Effects  of  the  4th  from  Karakahs.  If  the  4th  from  Karakahs  happens  to  be  occupied  by 
Sukr  and  Candr,  one  will  own  large  buildings,  like  palaces  etc.  Similar  is  the  effect  of  an 
exalted  Grah  in  the  said  4th.  A  house,  made  of  stones,  is  denoted  by  the  occupation  of  the  4th 
from  Karakahs  by  Rahu  and  Sani.  Mangal  and  Ketu  in  the  4th  from  Karakahs  indicate  a  house, 
made  of  bricks,  while  Guru  in  the  4th  from  Karakahs  denotes  a  house,  made  of  wood.  Surya  in 
the  4th  from  Karakahs  will  give  a  house  of  grass.  If  Candr  is  in  the  4th  from  Karakahs,  one  will 
have  union  with  his  wife  in  an  uncompounded  house. 

36-40.  Effects  of  the  5*  from  Karakahs.  If  Rahu  and  Mangal  are  in  the  5*  from  Karakahs,  one 
will  suffer  from  a  pulmonary  consumption,  more  so,  if  Candr  gives  them  a  Drishti.  The 
Drishti  of  Mangal  on  the  5th  from  Karakahs  will  bring  boils,  or  ulcers,  Ketu's  Drishti  on  the 
5th  from  Karakahs  will  cause  dysentery  and  other  diseases,  caused  by  (impure)  water.  If  Rahu 
and  Gulik  happen  to  be  in  the  5th  from  Karakahs,  there  will  be  fear  from  mean  people  and 
poison.  Should  Budh  be  in  the  5th  from  Karakahs,  the  native  will  be  an  ascetic  of  the  highest 
order,  or  one,  holding  staff.  Surya  in  the  5th  from  Karakahs  denotes  one,  using  a  knife.  Mangal 
in  the  5th  from  Karakahs  denotes  one,  using  a  spear.  Sani  denotes  a  bowman,  if  Sani  is  placed 
in  the  5l  from  Karakahs.  Rahu  in  the  5l  from  Karakahs  denotes  a  machinist.  Ketu  in  the  51 
from  Karakahs  denotes  a  watch  maker.  Sukr  in  the  5th  from  Karakahs  will  make  one  a  poet 
and  an  eloquent  speaker. 

41-45.  Effects  of  Karakahs  and  the  5th  from  there.  If  Guru  and  Candr  are  in  Karakahs,  or  the 
5th  thereof,  the  native  will  be  an  author.  Sukr  will  make  one  an  ordinary  writer,  while  Budh 
will  indicate,  that  the  writing  skills  are  less  than  those  of  an  ordinary  writer.  Should  Guru  be 
alone,  one  will  be  a  knower  of  everything,  be  a  writer  and  be  versed  in  Vedas  and  Vedanta 
philosophy,  but  not  an  oratorian,  or  a  grammarian.  Mangal  denotes  a  logician,  Budh  a 
Mimamsaka  (follower  of  Karma  Mimansa),  Sani  indicates,  that  one  is  dull-witted  in  the 
assembly,  Surya  denotes,  that  one  is  a  musician,  Candr  denotes  a  follower  of  Sankhya 
philosophy  (of  Maharishi  Kapila,  who  enumerated  25  true  principles  with  emphasis  on  final 
bliss)  and  indicates,  that  one  is  versed  in  rhetorics  and  singing  and  Ketu,  or  Rahu  denotes,  that 
one  is  a  Jyotishi.  Should  Guru  be  related  to  the  positions  of  Karakahs,  or  the  5th  from  there, 
while  the  Karakahs  is  caused  by  others  than  him,  the  effects,  as  stated,  will  effectively  come 
to  pass.  Some  say,  that  the  2nd  from  Karakahs  should  also  be  similarly  considered. 

46.  Effects  of  the  6th  from  Karakahs.  If  the  6th  from  Karakahs  is  occupied  by  a  malefic,  the 
native  will  be  an  agriculturist,  while  he  will  be  indolent,  if  a  benefic  is  in  the  6th  from 
Karakahs.  The  3rd  from  Karakahs  should  also  be  similarly  considered. 

47-48.  Effects  of  the  7th  from  Karakahs.  If  Candr  and  Guru  are  in  the  7th  from  Karakahs,  the 
native  will  beget  a  very  beautiful  wife.  Sukr  in  the  7th  form  Karakahs  denotes  a  sensuous  wife, 
while  Budh  in  the  7th  from  Karakahs  indicates  a  wife,  versed  in  arts.  Surya  in  the  7th  from 
Karakahs  will  give  a  wife,  who  will  be  confining  domestic  core,  while  Sani  in  the  7th  from 
Karakahs  denotes  a  wife  of  a  higher  age  bracket,  or  a  pious  and/or  sick  wife.  Rahu  in  the  7th 


from  Karakahs  will  bring  a  widow  in  marriage. 


49.  Effects  of  the  8l  from  Karakahs.  If  a  benefic,  or  the  Grah,  owning  the  8l  from  Karakahs, 
happens  to  be  in  the  8th  from  Karakahs,  the  native  will  be  long-lived,  while  a  malefic,  placed 
in  the  8th  from  Karakahs,  will  reduce  the  life  span.  Drishti/Yuti  of  both  benefics  and  malefics 
will  yield  a  medium  span  of  life. 

50-56.  Effects  of  the  9*  from  Karakahs.  If  the  9X  from  Karakahs  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is 
occupied  by  a  benefic,  the  native  will  be  truthful,  devoted  to  elders  and  attached  to  his  own 
religion.  If  a  malefic  gives  a  Drishti  to,  or  occupies  the  9th  from  Karakahs,  one  will  be 
attached  to  his  religion  in  boyhood,  but  will  take  to  falsehood  in  old  age.  If  Sani  and  Rahu, 
one  will  betray  his  elders  and  be  adverse  to  ancient  learning.  If  Guru  and  Surya,  one  will 
betray  his  elders  and  will  be  disobedient  to  them.  Should  Mangal  and  Sukr  give  a  Drishti  to, 
or  occupy  the  9th  from  Karakahs  and  are  joining  in  six  identical  Vargas,  a  female,  ill-related  to 
the  native,  will  die.  Budh  and  Candr  giving  a  Drishti  to,  or  occupying  the  9th  from  Karakahs 


and  joining  in  six  identical  Vargas  will  cause  imprisonment  of  the  native,  due  to  association 
with  a  female  not  of  his  own.  If  Guru  is  alone,  related  to  the  9th  from  Karakahs  by  Drishti,  or 
by  Yuti,  the  native  will  be  addicted  to  females  and  be  devoted  to  sensual  enjoyments. 


57-60.  Effects  of  the  10*  from  Karakahs.  If  the  10*  from  Karakahs  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or 
is  conjoined  by  a  benefic,  the  native  will  have  firm  riches,  be  sagacious,  strong  and  intelligent. 
A  malefic,  giving  a  Drishti  to  the  10th  from  Karakahs,  or  occupying  this  Bhava,  will  cause 
harm  to  his  profession  and  deprive  him  of  paternal  bliss.  Budh  and  Sukr,  giving  a  Drishti  to 
the  10th  from  Karakahs,  or  conjoining  this  Bhava,  will  confer  many  gains  in  business  and  will 
make  him  do  many  great  deeds.  Surya  and  Candr,  giving  a  Drishti  to  the  10th  from  Karakahs, 
or  conjoining  this  place  and  receiving  a  Drishti  from,  or  be  in  Yuti  with  Guru,  the  native  will 
acquire  a  kingdom. 

61-62.  Effects  of  the  1  ll  from  Karakahs.  If  the  1 1*  from  Karakahs  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or 
is  yuti  with  a  benefic,  the  native  will  enjoy  happiness  from  co-born  apart  from  gaining  in 
every  undertaking  of  his.  If  a  malefic  is  in  the  1 1th  from  Karakahs,  the  native  will  gain  by 
questionable  means,  be  famous  and  valorous. 

63-74.  Effects  of  the  12*  from  Karakahs.  If  the  12*  from  Karakahs  has  a  benefic,  the 
expenses  will  be  on  good  account,  while  a  malefic  in  the  12th  from  Karakahs  will  cause  bad 
expenses.  If  the  12th  from  Karakahs  is  vacant,  then  also  good  effects  will  follow.  If  there 
happens  to  be  a  benefic  Grah  in  exaltation,  or  in  own  Bhava  in  the  12th  from  Karakahs,  or,  if 
Ketu  is  so  placed  and  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  yuti  with  a  benefic,  one  will  attain  heaven 
after  death.  One  will  attain  full  enlightenment,  if  Ketu  is  in  the  12th  identical  with  Mesh,  or 
Dhanu  and  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic.  If  Ketu  is  in  the  12th  from  Karakahs,  receiving  a 
Drishti  from  a  malefic,  or  is  there  yuti  with  a  malefic,  one  will  not  attain  full  enlightenment.  If 
Surya  and  Ketu  are  in  the  12th  from  Karakahs,  the  native  will  worship  Lord  Shiva.  Candr  and 
Ketu  denotes  a  worshiper  of  Gauri.  Sukr  and  Ketu  of  Lakshmi  and  a  wealthy  person.  Mangal 
and  Ketu  of  Lord  Subramanya.  Rahu  will  make  one  worship  Durga,  or  some  mean  deity.  Ketu 
alone  denotes  Subramanya's,  or  Ganesh's  worshipper.  If  Sani  is  in  the  12th  from  Karakahs  in 
a  malefic' s  Rasi,  one  will  worship  mean  deities.  Sukr  and  Sani  in  the  12th  from  Karakahs  in  a 
malefic' s  Rasi  will  also  make  one  worship  mean  deities.  Similar  inferences  can  be  drawn 
from  the  6th  Navahs,  counted  from  Amatya  Karak's  Navahs. 

75-76.  Miscellaneous  Matters  (up  to  Sloka  84).  O  Brahmin,  if  there  are  two  malefics  in  a  Kon 
from  Karakahs,  the  native  will  have  knowledge  of  Mantras  and  Tantras  (formulas  for  the 
attainment  of  super-human  powers).  If  a  malefic  simultaneously  gives  a  Drishti  to  two 


malefics  in  a  Kon  from  Karakans,  the  native  will  use  his  learnings  of  Mantras  and  Tantras  for 
malevolent  purposes,  while  a  benefic's  Drishti  will  make  him  use  the  learnings  for  public 
good. 

77-841/2.  If  Candr  is  in  the  Karakans,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Sukr,  the  native  will  be  an 
alchemist  and,  if  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Budh  the  native  will  be  a  doctor  capable  of  curing 
all  diseases.  If  Candr  is  in  the  4th  from  Karakans  and  receives  a  Drishti  from  Sukr,  the  native 
will  be  afflicted  by  white  leprosy.  If  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Mangal,  the  native  will  have 
blood  and  bilious  disorders  and,  if  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Ketu,  the  native  will  suffer  from 
black  leprosy.  Should  Rahu  and  Mangal  be  in  the  4th,  or  5th  from  Karakans,  the  native  will 
suffer  from  pulmonary  consumption  and,  if  simultaneously  there  happens  to  be  Candr' s 
Drishti  on  the  41  ,  or  the  5l  ,  this  affliction  will  be  certain.  Mangal  alone  in  the  41  ,  or  the  5l 
will  cause  ulcers.  If  Ketu  is  in  the  4th,  or  the  5th,  one  will  suffer  from  dysentery  and  afflictions, 
due  to  (impure)  water.  Rahu  and  Gulik  will  make  one  a  doctor,  curing  poisonous  afflictions, 
or  will  cause  troubles  through  poison.  Should  Sani  be  alone  in  the  4th,  or  5th,  the  native  will  be 
skillful  in  archery.  Ketu  lonely  placed  in  the  4th,  or  the  5th  will  make  one  a  maker  of  watches 
etc.  Budh  lonely  placed  in  the  4th,  or  the  5th  will  make  one  an  ascetic  of  the  highest  order,  or 
an  ascetic,  holding  staff.  Rahu,  Surya  and  Mangal,  respectively,  in  these  places  denote  a 
machinist,  a  knife  user  and  a  spear,  or  arrow  user. 

85-86.  Candr  and  Guru  in  the  Karakans,  or  in  the  5th  therefrom  denotes  a  writer  well  versed  in 
all  branches  of  learning.  The  grade  of  writership  will  comparatively  descend  in  the  case  of 
Sukr  and  even  further  in  the  case  of  Budh. 

87-92V2.  Grahas  in  the  5th  from  Karakans.  Should  Sukr  be  in  the  5th  from  Karakans,  the  native 
will  be  eloquent  and  a  poet.  Guru  denotes,  that  he  be  an  exponent  and  be  all  knowing,  but  be 
unable  to  speak  in  an  assembly.  He  will  be  further  a  grammarian  and  a  scholar  in  Vedas  and 
Upanishads.  Sani  will  make  one  ineffective  in  an  assembly,  while  Budh  will  make  him  skilful 
in  Karma  Mimansa.  Mangal  in  Karakans,  or  the  5l  therefrom  will  make  one  justice,  while 
Candr  in  Karakans,  or  the  5th  from  there  denotes  a  Sankhya  Yogi,  a  rhetoric,  or  a  singer. 
Surya  in  the  5th  from  Karakans  will  make  one  learned  in  Vedanta  and  music.  Ketu  will  make 
one  a  mathematician  and  skilful  in  Jyotish.  Should  Guru  be  related  to  the  said  Ketu,  these 
learnings  will  be  by  inheritance.  All  these  as  well  apply  to  2nd  and  3rd  from  Karakans  and  to 
the  Karakans  itself  apart  from  applying  to  the  5th  from  Karakans. 

93-931/2.  Should  Ketu  be  in  the  2nd,  or  3rd  from  Karakans,  the  native  will  be  defective  in 
speech,  more  so,  if  a  malefic  gives  a  Drishti  to  Ketu,  as  above. 

94-99.  If  malefics  be  in  Karakans,  Arudh  Lagn  and  the  2nd  and  8th  from  these  places,  there 
will  be  Kemadrum  Yog,  the  effects  of  which  will  be  still  severer,  if  Candr' s  Drishti  happens 
to  be  there.  The  effects,  due  for  these  Yogas,  will  come  to  pass  in  the  Dasha  periods  of  the 
Rasis,  or  Grahas  concerned.  Kemadrum  Yog  will  operate  additionally,  if  there  are  malefics  in 
the  2nd  and  8th  from  the  Rasi,  whose  Dasha  will  be  in  currency.  The  results  of  such  Yog  will 
also  be  inauspicious.  If  the  2nd  and  8th  in  the  Kundali,  cast  for  the  beginning  of  a  Dasha,  have 
malefics,  then  also  Kemadrum  prevails  throughout  the  Dasha. 

Ch.  34.  Yoga  Karakas 

1.  O  Brahmin,  thus  I  have  told  you  about  the  effects,  derivable  through  Karakans.  Now  listen 
to  the  effects,  arising  out  of  lordships  of  Grahas  over  Bhavas. 


2-7.  Nature  due  to  Lordships  of  Grahas.  Benefics,  owning  Kendras,  will  not  give  benefic 
effects,  while  malefics,  owning  Kendras,  will  not  remain  inauspicious.  The  Lord  of  a  Kon  will 
give  auspicious  results.  The  Lord  of  Lagn  is  specially  auspicious,  as  Lagn  is  a  Kendr,  as  well 
as  a  Kon.  Putr  and  Dharm  Bhava  are  specially  for  wealth,  while  Yuvati  and  Karm  Bhava  are 
specially  for  happiness.  Any  Grah,  owning  Sahaj,  Ari,  or  Labh  Bhava,  will  give  evil  effects. 
The  effects,  due  to  the  Lords  of  Vyaya  and  Randhr  Bhava,  will  depend  on  their  association.  In 
each  group  the  significance  will  be  in  the  ascending  order.  Randhr' s  Lord  is  not  auspicious,  as 
he  owns  the  12th  from  Dharm  Bhava.  If  the  Lord  of  Randhr  Bhava  simultaneously  owns 
Sahaj,  Yuvati,  or  Labh  Bhava,  he  will  prove  specifically  harmful,  while  his  simultaneous 
ownership  of  a  Kon  will  bestow  auspicious  effects.  The  Grah,  owning  a  predominant  Bhava, 
will  stall  the  effects,  due  to  another,  owning  a  less  significant  Bhava  and  will  give  his  own 
results.  Randhr' s  lordship  of  Surya  and  Candr  is  not  evil. 

8-10.  Natural  Benefics  and  Malefics.  Guru  and  Sukr  are  benefics,  while  Candr  is  mediocre  in 
benefice  and  Budh  is  neutral  (a  benefic,  when  associated  with  a  benefic  and  a  malefic,  when 
related  to  a  malefic).  Malefics  are  Surya,  Sani  and  Mangal.  Full  Candr,  Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr 
are  stronger  in  the  ascending  order.  Weak  Candr,  Surya,  Sani  and  Mangal  are  stronger  (in 
malefic  disposition)  in  the  ascending  order.  In  revealing  maleficence,  due  to  rulership  of 
Kendras,  Candr,  Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr  are  significant  in  the  ascending  order. 

1 1-12.  Lordships  of  Kendras  and  Konas.  If  there  be  an  exchange  between  a  Lord  of  a  Kendr 
and  a  Lord  of  a  Kon,  or,  if  a  Lord  of  a  Kendr  is  yuti  with  a  Lord  of  a  Kon  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a 
Kon,  or,  if  a  Lord  of  a  Kon  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  vice  versa,  or,  if  there  happens  to  be  a  full  Drishti 
between  a  Lord  of  a  Kendr  and  a  Lord  of  a  Kon,  they  cause  a  Yog.  One  born  in  such  a  Yog 
will  become  a  king  and  be  famous. 

1 3 .  If  one  and  the  same  Grah  gets  the  lordships  of  a  Kon,  as  well  as  a  Kendr,  or,  if  a  Grah  is  in 
a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Kon,  it  will  prove  specially  a  Yog  Karak. 

14.  Lordship  of  Kendr.  It  has  been  said,  that  a  malefic,  owning  a  Kendr,  will  become 
auspicious,  which  is  true,  only  when  it  simultaneously  Lords  over  a  Kon  and  not  by  merely 
owning  a  Kendr. 

15.  If  the  Lords  of  a  Kendr,  or  a  Kon  own  simultaneously  an  evil  Bhava,  he  does  not  cause  a 
Raj  Yog  by  mere  relations  stipulated  (as  per  Ch.  34,  Slokas  1 1  and  12). 

16.  Rahu  and  Ketu.  Rahu  and  Ketu  give  predominantly  the  effects,  as  due  to  their  yuti  with  a 
Bhava  Lord,  or,  as  due  to  the  Bhava  they  occupy. 

17.  If  Rahu  and/or  Ketu  are  in  Kendr,  receiving  a  Drishti  from,  or  in  association  with  the  Lord 
of  a  Kon,  or  of  a  Kendr,  it  will  become  Yog  Karak. 

18.  O  Maharishi  Parashar,  please  narrate,  according  to  the  Rasis  rising,  as  to  which  Grah  is  a 
Yog  Karak  and  which  is  inauspicious. 

19-22.  Grahas  and  Mesh  Lagn.  O  Brahmin,  listen  to  these  with  examples.  Even  though 
Mangal  is  the  Lord  of  Randhr  Bhava,  he  will  be  helpful  to  auspicious  Grahas.  Sani,  Budh  and 
Sukr  are  malefics.  Auspicious  are  Guru  and  Surya.  The  mere  Yuti  of  Sani  with  Guru  will  not 
produce  auspicious  effects  (although  they  own  a  Kon  and  a  Kendr).  If  Guru  is  at  the  disposal 


of  a  malefic,  he  will  surely  give  inauspicious  results.  Sukr  is  a  direct  (independent)  killer.  Sani 
etc.  will  also  inflict  death,  if  associated  with  an  adverse  Grah  (Sukr). 

23-24.  Grahas  and  Vrishabh  Lagn.  Guru,  Sukr  and  Candr  are  malefics.  Sani  and  Surya  are 
auspicious.  Sani  will  cause  Raj  Yog.  Budh  is  somewhat  inauspicious.  The  Guru  group  (Guru, 
Candr  and  Sukr)  and  Mangal  will  inflict  death. 

25-26.  Grahas  and  Mithun  Lagn.  Mangal,  Guru  and  Surya  are  malefics,  while  Sukr  is  the  only 
auspicious  Grah.  The  Yuti  of  Guru  with  Sani  is  similar  to  that  for  Mesh  Lagn.  Candr  is  the 
prime  killer,  but  it  is  dependant  on  her  association. 

27-28.  Grahas  and  Kark  Lagn.  Sukr  and  Budh  are  malefics,  Mangal,  Guru  and  Candr  are 
auspicious.  Mangal  is  capable  of  conferring  a  full-fledged  Yog  and  giving  auspicious  effects. 
Sani  and  Surya  are  killers  and  give  effects,  according  to  their  associations. 

29-30.  Grahas  and  Simh  Lagn.  Budh,  Sukr  and  Sani  are  malefics.  Auspicious  effects  will  be 
given  by  Mangal,  Guru  and  Surya.  Guru's  Yuti  with  Sukr  (though,  respectively,  Kon  and 
Kendr  Lords)  will  not  produce  auspicious  results.  Sani  and  Candr  are  killers,  who  will  give 
effects,  according  to  their  associations. 

31-32.  Grahas  and  Kanya  Lagn.  Mangal,  Guru  and  Candr  are  malefics,  while  Budh  and  Sukr 
are  auspicious.  Sukr's  Yuti  with  Budh  will  produce  Yog.  Sukr  is  a  killer  as  well.  Surya' s  role 
will  depend  on  his  association. 

33-34.  Grahas  and  Tula  Lagn.  Guru,  Surya  and  Mangal  are  malefics.  Auspicious  are  Sani  and 
Budh.  Candr  and  Budh  will  cause  Raj  Yog.  Mangal  is  a  killer.  Guru  and  other  malefics  will 
also  acquire  a  disposition  to  inflict  death.  Sukr  is  neutral. 

35-36.  Grahas  and  Vrischik  Lagn.  Sukr,  Budh  and  Sani  are  malefics.  Guru  and  Candr  are 
auspicious.  Surya,  as  well  as  Candr  are  Yog  Karakas.  Mangal  is  neutral.  Sukr  and  other 
malefics  acquire  the  quality  of  causing  death. 

37-38.  Grahas  and  Dhanu  Lagn.  Only  Sukr  is  inauspicious.  Mangal  and  Surya  are  auspicious. 
Surya  and  Budh  are  capable  of  conferring  a  Yog.  Sani  is  a  killer,  Guru  is  neutral.  Sukr 
acquires  killing  powers. 

39-40.  Grahas  and  Makar  Lagn.  Mangal,  Guru  and  Candr  are  malefics,  Sukr  and  Budh  are 
auspicious.  Sani  will  not  be  a  killer  on  his  own.  Mangal  and  other  malefics  will  inflict  death. 
Surya  is  neutral.  Only  Sukr  is  capable  of  causing  a  superior  Yog. 

41-42.  Grahas  and  Kumbh  Lagn.  Guru,  Candr  and  Mangal  are  malefics,  while  Sukr  and  Sani 
are  auspicious.  Sukr  is  the  only  Grah,  that  causes  Raj  Yog.  Guru,  Surya  and  Mangal  are 
killers.  Budh  gives  meddling  effects. 

43-44.  Grahas  and  Meen  Bhava.  Sani,  Sukr,  Surya  and  Budh  are  malefics.  Mangal  and  Candr 
are  auspicious.  Mangal  and  Guru  will  cause  a  Yog.  Though  Mangal  is  a  killer,  he  will  not  kill 
the  native  (independently).  Sani  and  Budh  are  killers. 


45-46.  General.  Thus  the  auspicious  and  inauspicious  effects,  derivable  through  the  Grahas, 
due  to  their  lordship,  according  to  the  rising  Rasi,  have  to  be  estimated.  Apart  the  effects,  due 
to  Nabhash  Yogas  etc.,  should  also  be  known,  which  I  narrate,  as  under. 

Ch.  35.  Nabhash  Yogas 

1-2.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  explained  below  are  32  Nabhash  Yogas,  which  have  a  total 
of  1800  different  varieties.  These  consist  of  3  Asraya  Yogas,  2  Dala  Yogas,  20  Akriti  Yogas 
and  7  Sankhya  Yogas. 

3-6.  Names  of  Nabhash  Yogas.  The  3  Asraya  Yogas  are  Rajju,  Musala  and  Nala  Yogas.  The  2 
Dala  Yogas  are  Maal  and  Sarpa.  The  20  Akriti  Yogas  are  Gada,  Sakat,  Shringatak,  Vihag, 
Hal,  Vajr,  Kamal,  Vapi,  Yup,  Shar,  Shakti,  Danda,  Nisk,  Koot,  Chatr,  Dhanushi  (Chap), 
Ardh,  Candr,  Chakr  and  Samudr  Yogas.  The  7  Sankhya  Yogas  are  Vallaki,  Daam,  Paash, 
Kedara,  Sool,  Yuga  and  Gola  Yogas.  Thus  these  are  32  in  total. 

7.  Rajju,  Musala  and  Nala  Yogas.  All  the  Grahas  in  Movable  Rasis  cause  Rajju  Yog.  All  the 
Grahas  in  Fixed  Rasis  cause  Musala  Yog.  All  the  Grahas  in  Dual  Rasis  cause  Nala  Yog. 

8.  Maal  and  Sarpa  Yogas.  If  3  Kendras  are  occupied  by  benefics,  Maal  Yog  is  produced, 
while  malefics  so  placed  will  cause  Bhujang,  or  Sarpa  Yog.  These  Yogas,  respectively, 
produce  benefic  and  malefic  results. 

9-11.  Gada,  Sakat,  Vihag,  Shringatak,  Hal,  Vajr  and  Yav  Yogas.  If  all  the  Grahas  occupy  two 
successive  Kendras,  Gada  Yog  is  formed.  Sakat  Yog  occurs,  when  all  the  Grahas  are  disposed 
in  Lagn  and  Yuvati  Bhava.  If  all  confine  to  Bandhu  and  Karm  Bhava,  then  Vihag  Yog  occurs. 
All  Grahas  in  Lagn,  Putr  and  Dharm  Bhava  cause  Shringatak  Yog,  while  all  Grahas  in  Dhan, 
Ari  and  Karm  Bhava,  or  in  Sahaj,  Yuvati  and  Labh  Bhava,  or  in  Bandhu,  Randhr  and  Vyaya 
Bhava  cause  Hal  Yog.  Vajr  Yog  is  caused  by  all  benefics  in  Lagn  and  Yuvati  Bhava,  or  all 
malefics  in  Bandhu  and  Karm  Bhava.  In  a  contrary  situation,  i.e.  all  benefics  in  Bandhu  and 
Karm  Bhava,  or  all  malefics  in  Lagn  and  Yuvati  Bhava,  Yav  Yog  is  generated. 

12.  Kamal  and  Vapi  Yogas.  If  all  the  Grahas  are  in  the  4  Kendras,  Kamal  Yog  is  produced.  If 
all  of  them  happen  to  be  in  all  the  Apoklimas,  or  in  all  the  Panapharas,  Vapi  Yog  occurs. 

13.  Yup,  Shar,  Shakti  and  Danda  Yogas.  If  all  the  7  Grahas  are  in  the  4  Bhavas,  commencing 
from  Lagn,  they  cause  Yup  Yog,  if  from  Bandhu,  Shar  Yog  occurs,  if  from  Yuvati,  Shakti 
Yog  occurs  and,  if  from  Karm,  Danda  Yog  is  formed. 

14.  Nauka,  Koot,  Chatr  and  Chap  Yogas.  If  all  the  Grahas  occupy  the  seven  Bhavas  from 
Lagn,  Nauka  Yog  occurs,  if  from  Bandhu,  Koot  Yog  is  formed,  if  from  Yuvati,  Chatr  Yog 
occurs  and,  if  from  Karm,  Chap  Yog  occurs.  Here  again  the  Grahas  should  occupy  seven 
continuous  Bhavas. 

Quoted  from  Saravali.  If  the  seven  Grahas  occupy  continuously  seven  Bhavas,  commencing 
from  a  Bhava,  which  is  not  angular  to  the  Lagna,  the  Yoga  produced  is  known,  as  Ardh 
Candra  Yoga. 


15.  Chakr  and  Samudr  Yogas.  If  all  the  Grahas  occupy  six  alternative  Rasis,  commencing 
from  Lagn,  Chakr  Yog  is  formed.  Samudr  Yog  is  produced,  if  all  Grahas  occupy  six 
alternative  Rasis,  commencing  from  Dhan  Bhava. 

16-17.  Sankhya  Yogas.  If  all  Grahas  are  in  one  Rasi,  Gola  Yog  is  formed,  if  in  2,  Yuga  Yog  is 
formed,  if  in  3,  Sool  Yog  occurs,  if  in  4,  Kedara  Yog  occurs,  if  in  5,  Paash  Yog  is  formed,  if 
in  6,  Daam  Yog  occurs  and,  if  in  7,  Veena  Yog  is  produced.  None  of  these  seven  Yogas  will 
be  operable,  if  another  Nabhash  Yog  is  derivable. 

18.  Effects  of  Nabhash  Yogas  (up  to  Sloka  50).  Rajju  Yog.  One  born  in  Rajju  Yog  will  be 
fond  of  wandering,  be  charming,  will  earn  in  foreign  countries.  He  will  be  cruel  and 
mischievous. 

19.  Musala  Yog.  One  born  in  Musala  Yog  will  be  endowed  with  honour,  wisdom,  wealth  etc., 
be  dear  to  king,  famous,  will  have  many  sons  and  be  firm  in  disposition. 

20.  Nala  Yog.  One  born  in  Nala  Yog  will  have  uneven  physique,  be  interested  in 
accumulating  money,  very  skilful,  helpful  to  relatives  and  charming. 

21.  Maal  Yog.  One  born  in  Maal  Yog  will  be  ever  happy,  endowed  with  conveyances,  robes, 
food  and  pleasures,  be  splendourous  and  endowed  with  many  females. 

22.  Sarpa  Yog.  One  born  in  Sarpa  Yog  will  be  crooked,  cruel,  poor,  miserable  and  will 
depend  on  others  for  food  and  drinks. 

23.  Gada  Yog.  One  born  in  Gada  Yog  will  always  make  efforts  to  earn  wealth,  will  perform 
sacrificial  rites,  be  skilful  in  Shastras  and  songs  and  endowed  with  wealth,  gold  and  precious 
stones. 

24.  Sakat  Yog.  One  born  in  Sakat  Yog  will  be  afflicted  by  diseases,  will  have  diseased,  or 
ugly  nails,  be  foolish,  will  live  by  pulling  carts,  be  poor  and  devoid  of  friends  and  relatives. 

25.  Vihag  Yog.  One  born  in  Vihag  Yog  will  be  fond  of  roaming,  be  a  messenger,  will  live  by 
sexual  dealings,  be  shameless  and  interested  in  quarrels. 

26.  Shringatak  Yog.  One  born  in  Shringatak  Yog  will  be  fond  of  quarrels  and  battles,  be 
happy,  dear  to  king,  endowed  with  an  auspicious  wife,  be  rich  and  will  hate  women. 

27.  Hal  Yog.  One  born  in  Hal  Yog  will  eat  a  lot,  will  be  very  poor,  will  be  miserable,  agitated, 
given  up  by  friends  and  relatives.  He  will  be  a  servant. 

28.  Vajr  Yog.  One  born  in  Vajr  Yog  will  be  happy  in  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  life,  be 
valorous,  charming,  devoid  of  desires  and  fortunes  and  be  inimical. 

29.  Yav  Yog.  One  born  in  Yav  Yog  will  observe  fasts  and  other  religious  rules,  will  do 
auspicious  acts,  will  obtain  happiness,  wealth  and  sons  in  his  mid4ife.  He  will  be  charitable 
and  firm. 

30.  Kamal  Yog.  One  born  in  Kamal  Yog  will  be  rich  and  virtuous,  be  long  lived,  very  famous 
and  pure.  He  will  perform  hundreds  of  auspicious  acts  and  he  will  be  a  king. 


3 1 .  Vapi  Yog.  One  born  in  Vapi  Yog  will  be  capable  of  accumulating  wealth,  be  endowed 
with  lasting  wealth  and  happiness  and  sons,  be  free  from  eye  afflictions  and  will  be  a  king. 

32.  Yup  Yog.  One  born  in  Yup  Yog  will  have  spiritual  knowledge  and  will  be  interested  in 
sacrificial  rites.  He  will  be  endowed  with  a  wife,  be  strong,  interested  in  fasts  and  other 
religious  observations  and  be  distinguished. 

33.  Shar  Yog.  One  born  in  Shar  Yog  will  make  arrows,  be  head  of  a  prison,  will  earn  through 
animals,  will  eat  meat,  will  indulge  in  torture  and  mean  handiworks. 

34.  Shakti  Yog.  One  born  in  Shakti  Yog  will  be  bereft  of  wealth,  be  unsuccessful,  miserable, 
mean,  lazy,  long  lived,  interested  and  skilful  in  war,  firm  and  auspicious. 

35.  Danda  Yog.  One  born  in  Danda  Yog  will  lose  sons  and  wife,  will  be  indigent,  unkind, 
away  from  his  men  and  will  serve  mean  people. 

36.  Nauka  Yog.  One  born  in  Nauka  Yog  will  derive  his  livelihood  through  water,  be  wealthy, 
famous,  wicked,  wretched,  dirty  and  miserly. 

37.  Koot  Yog.  One  born  in  Koot  Yog  will  be  a  liar,  will  head  a  jail,  be  poor,  crafty,  cruel  and 
will  live  in  hills  and  fortresses. 

38.  Chatr  Yog.  One  born  in  Chatr  Yog  will  help  his  own  men,  be  kind,  dear  to  many  kings, 
very  intelligent,  happy  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  his  life  and  be  long-lived. 

39.  Chap  Yog.  One  born  in  Chap  Yog  will  be  liar,  will  protect  secrets,  be  a  thief,  be  fond  of 
wandering,  forests,  be  devoid  of  luck  and  be  happy  in  the  middle  of  the  life. 

40.  Ardh  Candr  Yog.  One  born  in  Ardh  Candr  Yog  will  lead  an  Army,  will  possess  a 
splendourous  body,  be  dear  to  king,  be  strong  and  endowed  with  gems,  gold  and  ornaments. 

41.  Chakr  Yog.  One  born  in  Chakr  Yog  will  be  an  emperor,  at  whose  feet  will  be  the 
prostrating  kings,  heads,  adoring  gem  studded  diadems. 

42.  Samudr  Yog.  One  born  in  Samudr  Yog  will  have  many  precious  stones  and  abundant 
wealth,  be  endowed  with  pleasures,  dear  to  people,  will  have  firm  wealth  and  be  well 
disposed. 

43.  Veena  Yog.  One  born  in  Veena  Yog  will  be  fond  of  songs,  dance  and  musical 
instruments,  be  skilful,  happy,  wealthy  and  be  a  leader  of  men. 

44.  Daamini  Yog.  One  born  in  Daamini  Yog  will  be  helpful  to  others,  will  have  righteously 
earned  wealth,  be  very  affluent,  famous,  will  have  many  sons  and  gems,  be  courageous  and 
red4ettered. 

45.  Paash  Yog.  One  born  in  Paash  Yog  will  be  liable  to  be  imprisoned,  be  skilful  in  work,  be 
deceiving  in  disposition,  will  talk  much,  be  bereft  of  good  qualities  and  will  have  many 
servants. 


46.  Kedara  Yog.  One  born  in  Kedara  Yog  will  be  useful  to  many,  be  an  agriculturist,  be 
truthful,  happy,  fickle-minded  and  wealthy. 

47.  Sool  Yog.  One  born  in  Sool  Yog  will  be  sharp,  indolent,  bereft  of  wealth,  be  tortuous, 
prohibited,  valiant  and  famous  through  war. 

48.  Yuga  Yog.  One  born  in  Yuga  Yog  will  be  heretic,  be  devoid  of  wealth,  be  discarded  by 
others  and  be  devoid  of  sons,  mother  and  virtues. 

49.  Gola  Yog.  One  born  in  Gola  Yog  will  be  strong,  be  devoid  of  wealth,  learning  and 
intelligence,  be  dirty,  sorrowful  and  miserable. 

50.  Ancestors  say,  that  the  results,  due  to  said  (Nabhash)  Yogas,  will  be  felt  throughout  in  all 
the  Dasha  periods. 

Ch.  36.  Many  Other  Yogas 

1-2.  Benefic  and  Malefic  Yogas.  If  there  be  a  benefic  in  Lagn,  Subh  Yog  is  produced,  while  a 
malefic  in  Lagn  causes  Asubh  Yog.  Benefics  in  both  Vyaya  and  Dhan  Bhava  cause  Subh 
Yog.  Malefics  in  both  Vyaya  and  Dhan  Bhava  cause  Asubh  Yog.  One  born  in  Subh  Yog  will 
be  eloquent,  charming  and  virtuous,  while  his  counterpart  will  be  sensuous,  will  do  sinful  acts 
and  will  enjoy  (swallow)  others'  wealth. 

3-4.  Gaj  Kesari  Yog.  Should  Guru  be  in  a  Kendr  from  Lagn,  or  from  Candr  and  be  yuti  with, 
or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  benefic,  avoiding  at  the  same  time  debilitation,  combustion  and 
inimical  Rasi,  Gaj  Kesari  Yog  is  caused.  One  born  in  Gaj  Kesari  Yog  will  be  splendourous, 
wealthy,  intelligent,  endowed  with  many  laudable  virtues  and  will  please  the  king. 

5-6.  Amal  Yog.  If  there  be  exclusively  a  benefic  in  the  10l  from  Lagn,  or  Candr,  Amal  Yog 
exists.  Amal  Yog  will  confer  fame,  lasting  till  Candr  and  stars  exist  and  will  make  the  native 
honoured  by  the  king,  enjoy  abundant  pleasures,  charitable,  fond  of  relatives,  helpful  to 
others,  pious  and  virtuous. 

7-8.  Parvat  Yog.  Benefics  in  Kendras  will  produce  Parvat  Yog,  as  Yuvati  and  Randhr  Bhava 
are  vacant,  or  are  occupied  by  only  benefics.  One  born  in  Parvat  Yog  will  be  wealthy, 
eloquent,  charitable,  learned  in  Shastras,  fond  of  mirth,  famous,  splendourous  and  be  the 
leader  of  a  city. 

9-10.  Kahal  Yog.  Should  Bandhu's  Lord  and  Guru  be  in  mutual  Kendras,  while  Lagn's  Lord 
is  strong,  Kahal  Yog  occurs.  Alternatively  Bandhu's  Lord,  being  in  his  own,  or  exaltation 
Rasi,  should  be  yuti  with  Karm's  Lord.  In  effect  the  native  will  be  energetic,  adventurous, 
charming,  endowed  with  a  complete  Army,  consisting  of  chariots,  elephants,  horses  and 
infantry  and  he  will  Lord  over  a  few  villages. 

11-12.  Chamar  Yog.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  exalted  in  a  Kendr  and  receives  a  Drishti  from  Guru, 
Chamar  Yog  is  formed.  This  Yog  also  occurs,  if  two  benefics  are  in  Lagn,  or  Dharm,  or 
Karm,  or  Yuvati  Bhava.  The  effects  of  Chamar  Yog  are:  the  native  will  be  a  king,  or 
honoured  by  the  king,  long  lived,  scholarly,  eloquent  and  versed  in  all  arts. 


13-14.  Shankh  Yog.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  strong,  while  the  Lords  of  Putr  and  Ari  Bhava  are  in 
mutual  Kendras,  then  what  is  known,  as  Shankh  Yog,  is  produced.  Alternatively,  if  Lagn's 
Lord  along  with  Karm's  Lord  is  in  a  Movable  Rasi,  while  Dharm's  Lord  is  strong,  Shankh 
Yog  is  obtained.  One  born  with  Shankh  Yog  will  be  endowed  with  wealth,  spouse  and  sons. 
He  will  be  kindly  disposed,  propitious,  intelligent,  meritorious  and  long-lived. 

15-16.  Bhairi  Yog.  If  Vyaya,  Tanu,  Dhan  and  Yuvati  Bhava  are  occupied,  as  Dharm's  Lord  is 
strong,  the  native  obtains  Bhairi  Yog.  Again  another  kind  of  Bhairi  Yog  is  formed,  if  Sukr, 
Guru  and  Lagn's  Lord  are  in  a  Kendr,  while  Dharm's  Lord  is  strong.  The  results  of  Bhairi 
Yog  are:  the  native  will  be  endowed  with  wealth,  wife  and  sons.  He  will  be  a  king,  be  famous, 
virtuous  and  endowed  with  good  behaviour,  happiness  and  pleasures. 

17.  Mridang  Yog.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  strong  and  others  occupy  Kendras,  Konas,  own  Bhavas, 
or  exaltation  Rasis,  Mridang  Yog  is  formed.  The  native  concerned  will  be  a  king,  or  equal  to  a 
king  and  be  happy. 

18.  Shrinath  Yog.  If  Yuvati's  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava,  while  Karm's  Lord  is  exalted  and  yuti 
with  Dharm's  Lord,  Shrinath  Yog  takes  place.  The  native  with  Shrinath  Yog  will  be  equal  to 
Lord  Devendra  (god  of  gods). 

19-20.  Sharad  Yog.  Should  Karm's  Lord  be  in  Putr  Bhava,  while  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  as  Surya 
with  strength  is  in  Simh,  Sharad  Yog  is  formed.  This  will  again  be  obtained,  if  Guru,  or  Budh 
is  in  a  Kon  to  Candr,  while  Mangal  is  in  Labh  Bhava.  One  born  in  either  kind  of  Yog  will 
obtain  wealth,  spouse  and  sons,  be  happy,  scholarly,  dear  to  the  king,  pious  and  virtuous. 

21-22.  Matsya  Yog.  Benefics  in  Dharm  and  Tanu  Bhava,  mixed  Grahas  in  Putr  Bhava  and 
malefics  in  Bandhu  and  Randhr  Bhava:  this  array  of  Grahas  at  birth  will  produce  Matsya  Yog. 
In  effect  the  native  will  be  a  Jyotishi,  be  a  synonym  of  kindness,  be  virtuous,  strong,  beautiful, 
famous,  learned  and  pious. 

23-24.  Kurm  Yog.  If  Putr,  Ari  and  Yuvati  Bhava  are  occupied  by  benefic  Grahas  identical 
with  own  Bhava,  or  exaltation,  or  friendly  Rasi,  while  malefics  are  in  Sahaj,  Labh  and  Tanu 
Bhava,  in  own  Bhava,  or  in  exaltation,  Kurm  Yog  is  formed.  The  results  of  Kurm  Yog  are:  the 
native  will  be  a  king,  be  courageous,  virtuous,  famous,  helpful,  happy.  He  will  be  a  leader  of 
men. 

25-26.  Khadg  Yog.  Should  there  be  an  exchange  of  Rasis  between  the  Lords  of  Dhan  and 
Dharm  Bhava,  as  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Kon,  Khadg  Yog  is  obtained.  One  with 
Khadg  Yog  will  be  endowed  with  wealth,  fortunes  and  happiness,  be  learned  in  Shastras,  be 
intelligent,  mighty,  grateful  and  skilful. 

27-28.  Lakshmi  Yog.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  a  Kendr  identical  with  his  Mooltrikon  Rasi,  or 
own  Rasi,  or  in  exaltation,  while  Lagn's  Lord  is  endowed  with  strength,  Lakshmi  Yog  occurs. 
The  native  with  Lakshmi  Yog  will  be  charming,  virtuous,  kingly  in  status,  endowed  with 
many  sons  and  abundant  wealth.  He  will  be  famous  and  of  high  moral  merits. 

29-30.  Kusum  Yog.  Sukr  in  a  Kendr,  Candr  in  a  Kon  along  with  a  benefic  and  Sani  in  Karm 
Bhava:  these  Grahas  thus  cause  Kusum  Yog  for  one  born  in  a  Fixed  Rasi  ascending.  Such  a 
native  will  be  a  king,  or  equal  to  him,  be  charitable,  will  enjoy  pleasures,  be  happy,  prime 
among  his  race  men,  virtuous  and  red-lettered. 


31-32.  Kalanidhi  Yog.  If  Gum  is  placed  in  Dhan,  or  Putr  Bhava  and  receives  a  Drishti  from 
Budh  and  Sukr,  Kalanidhi  Yog  is  caused.  In  effect  the  native  will  be  virtuous,  honoured  by 
the  kings,  bereft  of  diseases,  be  happy,  wealthy  and  learned. 

33-34.  Kalpa  Drum  Yog.  Note  the  following  four  Grahas:  Lagn's  Lord  ,  the  dispositor  of 
Lagn's  Lord  (a),  the  dispositor  of  the  Grah  "a"  (b),  the  Navahs  dispositor  of  the  Grah  "b".  If 
all  these  are  disposed  in  Kendras  and  in  Konas  from  Lagn,  or  are  exalted,  Kalpa  Drum  Yog 
exists.  One  with  Kalpa  Drum  Yog  will  be  endowed  with  all  kinds  of  wealth,  be  a  king,  pious, 
strong,  fond  of  war  and  merciful. 

35-36.  Trimurthi  Yogas.  Counted  from  Dhan's  Lord,  if  benefics  occupy  the  2nd,  12th  and  8th, 
Hari  Yog  is  formed.  If  the  4th,  9th  and  8th  with  reference  to  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  Yuvati's 
Lord,  are  occupied  by  benefics,  Hara  Yog  is  obtainable.  Brahma  Yog  is  generated,  if,  counted 
from  Lagn's  Lord,  benefics  are  in  the  4th,  10th  and  1 1th  Rasis.  One  born  in  anyone  of  the  said 
three  Yogas  will  be  happy,  learned  and  endowed  with  wealth  and  sons. 


37.  Lagn  Adhi  Yog.  Should  benefics  be  in  Yuvati  and  Randhr  Bhava,  counted  from  Lagn  and 
be  devoid  of  Yuti  with  and/or  Drishti  from  malefics,  Lagn  Adhi  Yog  is  produced,  making  one 
a  great  person,  learned  in  Shastras  and  happy. 

38-39.  Effects  of  Lagn's  Lord's  Division  Dignities.  Lagn's  Lord  in  Parijatahs  will  make  one 
happy,  in  Vargottama  will  give  immunity  to  diseases,  in  Gopurahs  will  make  one  rich  with 
wealth  and  grains,  in  Simhasanahs  will  make  one  a  king,  in  Paravatahs  will  make  one  a 
scholar,  in  Devalokahs  will  make  one  opulent  and  endowed  with  conveyances  and  in 
Iravatahs  will  make  one  famous  and  honoured  by  kings.  (Vargottama  indicates  a  Grah, 
occupying  the  same  Rasi  and  the  same  Navahs) 

Ch.  37.  Candr's  Yogas 

1 .  If  Candr  with  reference  to  Surya  is  in  a  Kendr,  one's  wealth,  intelligence  and  skill  will  be 
little,  if  in  a  Panaphara,  will  be  meddling,  if  in  a  Apoklima,  will  be  excellent. 

2-4.  In  the  case  of  a  day  birth,  if  Candr,  placed  in  its  own  Navahs,  or  in  a  friendly  Navahs, 
receives  a  Drishti  from  Guru,  one  will  be  endowed  with  wealth  and  happiness.  One  born  at 
night  time  will  enjoy  similar  effects,  if  Candr  is  in  its  own  Navahs,  or  in  a  friendly  Navahs, 
receiving  a  Drishti  from  Sukr.  In  a  contrary  situation,  the  Drishti  from  Guru,  or  from  Sukr  on 
Candr  will  make  one  go  with  little  wealth,  or  even  without  that. 

5.  Adhi  Yog  from  Candr.  If  benefics  occupy  the  8th,  6th  and  7th,  counted  from  Candr,  Adhi 
Yog  obtains.  According  to  the  strength  of  the  participating  Grahas,  the  native  concerned  will 
be  either  a  king,  or  a  minister,  or  an  Army  chief. 

6.  Dhan  Yog.  Should  all  the  (three)  benefics  be  Upachaya,  counted  from  Candr,  one  will  be 
very  affluent.  With  two  benefics,  placed  in  the  3rd,  the  6th,  the  10th  and  the  1 1th,  one  will  have 
medium  effects  in  regard  to  wealth.  If  a  single  benefic  is  there,  the  wealth  will  be  negligible. 

7-10.  Sunaph,  Anaph  and  Duradhar.  If  there  is  a  Grah  other  than  Surya,  in  the  2nd  from  Candr, 
Sunaph  Yog  is  formed,  if  in  the  12th  from  Candr,  Anaph  Yog  is  formed  and,  if  in  the  2nd  and 
12th  from  Candr,  Duradhar  Yog  is  caused.  One  with  Sunaph  Yog  will  be  a  king,  or  equal  to  a 
king,  endowed  with  intelligence,  wealth,  fame  and  self-earned  wealth.  One  born  in  Anaph 


Yog  will  be  a  king,  be  free  from  diseases,  virtuous,  famous,  charming  and  happy.  One  born  in 
Duradhar  Yog  will  enjoy  pleasures,  will  be  charitable  and  endowed  with  wealth,  conveyances 
and  excellent  serving  force. 

11-13.  Kema  Drum  Yog.  Excluding  Surya,  should  there  be  no  Grah  with  Candr,  or  in  the  2nd 
and/or  12*  from  Candr,  or  in  a  Kendr  from  Lagn,  Kema  Drum  Yog  is  formed.  One  born  in 
Kema  Drum  Yog  will  be  very  much  reproached,  will  be  bereft  of  intelligence,  learning, 
reduced  to  penury  and  perils. 


Ch.  38.  Surya's  Yogas 


1.  Vesi,  Vosi  and  Abhayachari  Yogas.  Barring  Candr,  if  a  Grah  among  Mangal  etc.  be  in  the 
2nd  from  Surya,  Vesi  Yog  is  formed,  if  in  the  12th  from  Surya,  Vosi  Yog  is  formed  and  if  in 
both  the  2nd  and  the  12th  from  Surya,  Ubhayachari  Yog  is  caused. 

2-3.  Effects  of  Vesi,  Vosi  and  Ubhayachari  Yogas.  One  born  in  Vesi  Yog  will  be  even 
sighted,  truthful,  long-bodied,  indolent,  happy  and  endowed  with  negligible  wealth.  One  born 
with  Vosi  Yog  will  be  skilful,  charitable  and  endowed  with  fame,  learning  and  strength.  The 
Ubhayachari  native  will  be  a  king,  or  equal  to  a  king  and  be  happy. 

4.  Benefics,  causing  Vesi,  Vosi,  or  Ubhayachari  Yogas,  will  give  the  above-mentioned 
effects,  while  malefics  will  produce  contrary  effects. 


Ch.  39.  Raj  Yog 


1-2.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  I  now  narrate  below  the  Raj  Yogas,  making  one  entitled  to 
royal  honour.  These  were  told  to  Parvati  by  Lord  Shiva  once  upon  a  time,  the  gist  of  which  is, 
as  follows. 

3-5.  Raj  Yogas  are  to  be  known  from  the  Karakahs  Lagn  and  the  natal  Lagn.  On  the  one  hand 
the  pair  of  Atma  Karak  and  Putr  Karak  should  be  considered  and  on  the  other  hand  the  natal 
Lagn's  Lord  and  Putr' s  Lord  should  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  effects,  due  to  such 
association,  will  be  full,  or  a  half,  or  a  quarter,  according  to  their  strengths. 

6-7.  Maha  Raj  Yog.  Should  Lagn's  Lord  and  Putr's  Lord  exchange  their  Rasis,  or,  if  Atma 
Karak  and  Putr  Karak  (Char)  are  in  Lagn,  or  in  Putr  Bhava,  or  in  the  exaltation  Rasi,  or  in 
own  Rasi,  or  in  own  Navahs,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  Maha  Raj  Yog  is  produced. 
The  native  so  born  will  be  famous  and  happy. 

8.  If  Lagn's  Lord  and  Atma  Karak  are  in  Tanu,  Putr,  or  Yuvati  Bhava,  yuti  with,  or  receiving 
a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  a  Raj  Yog  is  formed. 

9-10.  Should  there  be  benefics  in  the  2nd,  the  4th  and  the  5th,  counted  either  from  Lagn's  Lord, 
or  from  Atma  Karak  Rasi,  one  will  become  a  king.  Similarly  malefics  in  the  3r  and  6X  from 
Lagn's  Lord,  or  from  Atma  Karak  Rasi  will  make  one  a  king. 

1 1 .  One  will  be  related  to  royal  circles,  if  Sukr  is  the  Karakahs,  or  in  the  5th  there  from,  or  in 
Lagn,  or  in  Arudh  Lagn,  receiving  a  Drishti  from,  or  yuti  with  Guru,  or  Candr. 


12.  Even,  if  a  single  Grah  gives  a  Drishti  to  the  natal  Lagn,  or  Hora  Lagn,  or  Ghatik  Lagn,  the 
native  will  become  a  king. 

13-14.  If  the  Shad  Vargas  of  Lagn  are  occupied,  or  receive  a  Drishti  from  one  and  the  same 
Grah,  a  Raj  Yog  is  doubtlessly  formed.  Accordingly,  if  the  Drishti  is  full,  half,  or  one  fourth, 
results  will  be  in  order  full,  medium  and  negligible. 

15.  If  the  3  Lagnas  (natal,  Hora  and  Ghatik)  are  occupied  by  Grahas  in  exaltation,  or  in  own 
Rasi,  or,  if  the  natal  Lagn,  the  Dreshkan  Lagn  and  the  Navahs  Lagn  have  exalted  Grahas,  Raj 
Yog  is  formed. 

16.  If  Candr  and  a  benefic  are  in  the  Arudh  Lang,  as  Guru  is  in  the  2nd  from  the  natal  Lagn 
and  both  these  places  are  receiving  Drishtis  from  Grahas  in  exaltation,  or  Grahas  in  own  Rasi, 
there  will  be  a  Raj  Yog. 

17.  If  Lagn,  Dhan  and  Bandhu  Bhava  are  occupied  by  benefics,  while  a  malefic  is  in  Sahaj 
Bhava,  one  will  become  a  king,  or  equal  to  a  king. 

18.  The  native  will  be  wealthy,  if  one  among  Candr,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Budh  is  exalted  in  Dhan 
Bhava. 

19.  If  Ari,  Randhr  and  Sahaj  Bhava  are  occupied  by  debilitated  Grahas,  as  Lagn's  Lord  is 
exalted,  or  is  in  own  Bhava  and  gives  a  Drishti  to  Lagn,  there  is  a  Raj  Yog. 

20.  Again  a  Raj  Yog  is  formed,  if  Ari's,  Randhr's  and  Vyaya's  Lords  are  in  fall,  or  in  inimical 
Rasis,  or  in  combustion,  as  Lagn's  Lord,  placed  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  its  exaltation  Rasi, 
gives  a  Drishti  to  Lagn. 

21.  If  Karm's  Lord,  placed  in  his  own  Bhava,  or  in  its  exaltation  Rasi,  gives  a  Drishti  to  Lagn, 
a  Raj  Yog  is  formed.  Similar  is  the  case,  if  benefics  are  in  Kendras. 

22.  If  the  Atma  Karak  Grah  is  in  a  benefic' s  Rasi/Navahs,  the  native  will  be  wealthy.  If  there 
are  benefics  in  Kendras  from  Karakahs  Lagn,  he  will  become  a  king. 

23.  If  the  Arudh  Lagn  and  Dar  Pad  are  in  mutual  Kendras,  or  in  mutual  Sahaj/Labh  Bhavas,  or 
in  mutual  Konas,  the  native  will  doubtlessly  become  a  king. 

24.  If  two,  or  all  of  Bhava,  Hora,  Ghatik  Lagnas  are  receiving  a  Drishti  from  exalted  Grahas,  a 
Raj  Yog  is  formed. 

25.  If  Bhava,  Hora  and  Ghatik  Lagnas,  their  Dreshkanas  and  Navahsas,  or  the  said  Lagnas  and 
their  Navahsas,  or  the  said  Lagnas  and  their  Dreshkanas  receive  a  Drishti  from  a  Grah,  a  Raj 
Yog  is  formed. 

26-27.  If  Arudh  Pad  is  occupied  by  an  exalted  Grah,  particularly  Candr  in  exaltation,  or  by 
Guru  and/or  Sukr  (with,  or  without  exaltation),  while  there  is  no  Argala  by  a  malefic,  the 
native  will  become  a  king.  If  the  Arudh  Pad  is  a  benefic  Rasi,  containing  Candr,  while  Guru  is 
in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  same  effect  will  prevail. 


28.  Even,  if  one  among  Ari's,  Randhr's  and  Vyaya's  Lords,  being  in  debilitation,  gives  a 
Drishti  to  Lagn,  there  will  be  a  Raj  Yog. 

29-3 1 .  The  native  will  become  a  king,  if  a  Grah,  ruling  Bandhu,  Karm,  Dhan,  or  Labh,  gives  a 
Drishti  to  Lagn,  while  Sukr  gives  a  Drishti  to  the  1 1th  from  Arudh  Lagn,  as  Arudh  Lagn  is 
occupied  by  a  benefic.  The  same  effect  will  be  obtained,  if  a  debilitated  Grah  gives  a  Drishti 
to  Lagn  and  is  placed  in  Ari,  or  Randhr  Bhava.  Again  similar  result  will  prevail,  if  a 
debilitated  Grah,  placed  in  Sahaj,  or  Labh  Bhava,  gives  a  Drishti  to  Lagn. 

32. 1  now  tell  you  of  the  Raj  Yogas,  based  on  the  Grahas  with  different  dignities  and  on  the 
Drishtis  and  Yutis  of  the  Grahas. 

33-34.  Dharm's  Lord  is  akin  to  a  minister  and  more  especially  Putr's  Lord.  If  these  two 
Grahas  mutually  give  a  Drishti,  the  native  will  obtain  a  kingdom.  Even,  if  these  two  are  yuti 
in  any  Bhava,  or,  if  they  happen  to  be  placed  in  mutually  7*  places,  one  born  of  royal  scion 
will  become  a  king. 

35.  The  native  will  attain  a  kingdom,  if  Bandhu' s  Lord  is  in  Karm  Bhava  and  Karm's  Lord  is 
in  Bandhu  Bhava  and,  if  these  Grahas  give  a  Drishti  to  Putr's  and  Dharm's  Lords. 

36.  If  the  Lords  of  Putr,  Karm,  Bandhu  and  Lagn  are  yuti  in  Dharm  Bhava,  one  will  become  a 
ruler  with  fame,  spreading  over  the  four  directions. 

37.  Should  the  Lord  of  Bandhu,  or  of  Karm  Bhava  join  either  the  Putr's  Lord,  or  Dharm's 
Lord,  the  native  will  obtain  a  kingdom. 

38.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Lagn,  Bandhu,  or  Karm  Bhava,  yuti  with  Dharm's  Lord,  or  Lagn  Lord, 
the  native  will  become  a  king. 

39.  Should  Guru  be  in  his  own  Rasi  identical  with  Dharm  Bhava  and  yuti  with  either  Sukr,  or 
Putr's  Lord,  the  native  will  obtain  royal  status. 

40.  Two  and  a  half  Ghatis  from  mid-day,  or  from  mid-night  is  auspicious  time.  A  birth  during 
such  an  auspicious  time  will  cause  one  to  be  a  king,  or  equal  to  him. 

41.  Should  Candr  and  Sukr  be  mutually  in  Sahaj  and  Labh  Bhava  and  receiving  Drishtis  from 
each  other,  while  they  are  placed  elsewhere,  a  Raj  Yog  is  obtained. 

42.  Should  Candr,  endowed  with  strength,  be  Vargottahs  and  receives  a  Drishti  from  four,  or 
more  Grahas,  the  native  will  become  a  king. 

43.  One  will  become  a  king,  if  Lagn  in  Uttamahs  receives  a  Drishti  from  four,  or  more 
Grahas,  out  of  which  Candr  should  not  be  one. 

44.  If  one,  or  two,  or  three  Grahas  are  in  exaltation,  one  of  a  royal  scion  will  become  a  king, 
while  another  will  be  equal  to  a  king,  or  be  wealthy. 

45.  If  four,  or  five  Grahas  occupy  their  exaltation  Rasis,  or  Mooltrikon  Rasis,  even  a  person  of 
base  birth  will  become  king. 


46.  If  six  Grahas  are  exalted,  the  native  will  become  emperor  and  will  enjoy  various  kinds  of 
royal  paraphernalia. 

47.  Even,  if  one  among  Guru,  Sukr  and  Budh  is  in  exaltation,  while  a  benefic  is  in  a  Kendr, 
the  native  will  become  a  king,  or  be  equal  to  him. 

48.  If  all  benefics  are  relegated  to  Kendras,  while  malefics  are  in  Sahaj,  Ari  and  Labh  Bhava, 
the  native,  though  may  be  of  mean  descent,  will  ascend  the  throne. 

Ch.  40.  Yogas  For  Royal  Association 

1.  If  Karm's  Lord  is  yuti  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  the  dispositor  of  Amatya  Karak,  or 
even,  if  Karm's  Lord  is  yuti  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  Amatya  Karak  himself,  the  native 
will  be  a  chief  in  the  king's  court. 

2.  If  Karm  and  Labh  Bhava  are  devoid  of  malefic  occupation  and  devoid  of  Drishti  from  a 
malefic,  while  Labh  Bhava  receives  a  Drishti  from  its  own  Lord,  the  native  will  be  a  chief  in 
the  king's  court. 

3.  Should  Amatya  Karak  and  the  dispositor  of  Atma  Karak  be  together,  the  native  will  be 
endowed  with  great  intelligence  and  will  be  a  king's  minister.  ('Karakendr'  is  interpreted 
here,  as  the  dispositor  of  Atma  Karak.  Similarly  'Amatyesa'  means  the  dispositor  of  Amatya 
Karak) 

4.  If  Atma  Karak  is  strong  and  is  with  a  benefic,  or  Amatya  Karak  is  in  its  own  Bhava,  or  in 
exaltation,  one  will  surely  become  a  king's  minister. 

5.  There  is  no  doubt  in  one's  becoming  a  king's  minister  and  famous,  if  Atma  Karak  is  in 
Tanu,  or  Putr,  or  Dharm  Bhava. 

6.  If  Atma  Karak,  or  Amatya  Karak  is  placed  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Kon,  the  native  will  beget 
royal  mercy,  royal  patronage  and  happiness  thereof. 

7.  Should  malefics  be  in  the  3rd  and  the  6th  from  Atma  Karak,  or  from  Arudh  Lagn,  or  in  Sahaj 
and  Ari  Bhava,  one  will  become  Army  chief. 

8.  If  Atma  Karak  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Kon,  or  in  exaltation,  or  in  its  own  Bhava  and  gives  a 
Drishti  to  Dharm' s  Lord,  the  native  will  be  a  king's  minister. 

9.  If  the  Lord  of  the  Rasi,  where  Candr  is  placed  becomes  Atma  Karak  and,  if  this  Lord  is 
placed  in  Tanu  Bhava  along  with  a  benefic,  the  native  will  become  a  king's  minister  at  his 
advanced  age. 

10.  Should  the  Atma  Karak  be  in  Putr,  Yuvati,  Karm,  or  Dharm  Bhava  and  happen  to  be  with 
a  benefic,  one  will  earn  wealth  through  royal  patronage. 

11.  If  the  Arudh  of  Dharm  Bhava  happens  to  be  itself  the  Janm  Lagn,  or,  if  Atma  Karak  is 
placed  in  Dharm  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  associated  with  royal  circles. 


12.  One  will  gain  through  royal  association,  if  Labh  Bhava  is  occupied  by  its  own  Lord  and  is 
devoid  of  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic.  The  Atma  Karak  should  at  the  same  time  be  yuti  with  a 
benefic. 

13.  An  exchange  of  Rasis  between  Karm's  Lord  and  Lagn's  Lord  will  make  the  native 
associated  with  the  king  in  a  great  manner. 

14.  If  Sukr  and  Candr  are  in  the  4th  from  Karakahs  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  endowed  with 
royal  insignia. 

15.  Should  Lagn's  Lord,  or  the  Atma  Karak  be  yuti  with  Putr's  Lord  and  be  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a 
Kon,  the  native  will  be  a  king,  or  minister. 

Ch.  41.  Combinations  for  Wealth 

1 . 1  now  tell  you  of  special  combinations,  giving  wealth.  One  born  to  these  Yogas  will  surely 
become  wealthy. 

2.  Yogas  for  Great  Affluence  (up  to  Sloka  8).  Should  a  Rasi  of  Sukr  be  Putr  Bhava  and  be 
occupied  by  Sukr  himself,  while  Mangal  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  obtain  great  riches. 

3.  Should  a  Rasi  of  Budh  be  Putr  Bhava  and  be  occupied  by  Budh  himself,  as  Labh  Bhava  is 
occupied  by  Candr,  Mangal  and  Guru,  the  native  will  be  very  affluent. 

4.  Should  Simh  be  Putr  Bhava  and  be  occupied  by  Surya  himself,  as  Sani,  Candr  and  Guru  are 
in  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  be  very  affluent. 

5.  Should  Surya  and  Candr  be  in  Labh  Bhava,  as  Sani  is  in  Putr  Bhava  identical  with  his  own 
Bhava,  the  native  will  be  very  affluent. 

6.  Should  Guru  be  in  Putr  Bhava  identical  with  his  own  Rasi,  as  Budh  is  in  Labh  Bhava,  the 
native  will  be  very  affluent. 

7.  If  a  Rasi  of  Mangal  happens  to  be  Putr  Bhava  with  Mangal  therein,  while  Sukr  is  in  Labh 
Bhava,  the  native  will  become  very  affluent. 

8.  If  Kark  happens  to  be  Putr  Bhava,  containing  Candr  therein,  while  Sani  is  in  Labh  Bhava, 
the  native  will  become  very  affluent. 

9.  Yogas  for  Wealth  (up  to  Sloka  15).  Should  Surya  be  in  Simh  identical  with  Lagn  and  be 
yuti  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Mangal  and  Guru,  one  will  be  wealthy. 

10.  Should  Candr  be  in  Kark  identical  with  Lagn  and  be  yuti  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from 
Budh  and  Guru,  one  will  be  wealthy. 

1 1 .  Should  Mangal  be  in  Lagn  identical  with  his  own  Rasi  and  be  yuti  with,  or  receiving  a 
Drishti  from  Budh,  Sukr  and  Sani,  the  native  will  be  rich. 

12.  Should  Budh's  Rasi  be  Lagn  with  Budh  therein  and  should  Budh  be  yuti  with,  or 
receiving  a  Drishti  from  Sani  and  Guru,  the  native  will  be  rich. 


13.  Should  Guru  be  in  Lagn  identical  with  his  own  Rasi  and  be  yuti  with,  or  receiving  a 
Drishti  from  Budh  and  Mangal,  the  native  will  be  rich. 

14.  If  Sukr  happens  to  be  in  Lagn  identical  with  his  own  Rasi  and  be  yuti  with,  or  receiving  a 
Drishti  from  Sani  and  Budh,  one  will  be  wealthy. 

15.  If  Sani  is  in  his  own  Rasi  identical  with  Lagn  and  receiving  a  Drishti  from,  or  being  yuti 
with  Mangal  and  Guru,  the  native  will  be  wealthy. 

16.  Other  Qualified  Grahas.  Dharm's  Lord  and  Putr's  Lord  are  capable  of  bestowing  wealth. 
Similarly  Grahas,  yuti  with  Dharm's  Lord  and/or  Putr's  Lord  are  capable  of  bestowing 
wealth.  There  is  no  doubt,  that  these  Grahas  will  give  wealth  during  their  Dasha  periods. 

17.  The  Yogas,  mentioned  above  (up  to  SI  oka  16)  should  be  delineated  after  knowing 
favourable,  or  unfavourable  dispositions  of  the  participant  Grahas  and  their  strength  and 
weakness. 

18-19.  Effects  of  the  Divisional  Dignities  of  the  Lords  of  Kendras.  If  the  Lord  of  a  Kendr  is  in 
Parijatahs,  the  native  will  be  liberal,  if  in  Uttamahs,  will  be  highly  liberal,  if  in  Gopurahs,  will 
be  endowed  with  prowess,  if  in  Simhasanahs,  will  be  honourable,  if  in  Paravatahs,  will  be 
valorous,  if  in  Devalokahs,  will  be  head  of  an  assembly,  if  in  Brahmalokahs,  will  be  a  sage 
and,  if  in  Iravatahs,  will  be  delighted  and  be  celebrated  in  all  quarters. 

20-22.  Effects  of  the  Divisional  Dignities  of  Putr's  Lord.  If  Putr's  Lord  is  in  Parijatahs,  the 
native  will  take  to  the  branch  of  learning,  befitting  his  race,  if  in  Uttamahs,  will  have  excellent 
learning,  if  in  Gopurahs,  will  receive  world-wide  honours,  if  in  Simhasanahs,  will  become  a 
minister,  if  in  also  Paravatahs,  will  be  endowed  with  Vedic  Knowledge,  if  in  Devalokahs,  will 
be  a  Karm  Yogi  (performer  of  actions,  worldly  and  religious  rites),  if  in  Brahmalokahs,  will 
be  devoted  to  the  Lord  and,  if  in  Iravatahs,  will  be  pious. 

23-27.  Effects  of  the  Divisional  Dignities  of  Dharm's  Lord.  If  Dharm's  Lord  is  in  Parijatahs, 
the  native  will  visit  holy  places,  if  in  Uttamahs,  has  been  visiting  holy  places  in  the  past  births 
and  he  will  do  the  same  within  this  life-time,  if  in  Gopurahs,  will  perform  sacrificial  rites,  if  in 
Simhasanahs,  will  be  mighty  and  truthful,  conquerer  of  his  senses  and  will  concentrate  only 
on  the  Brahman,  giving  up  all  religions,  if  in  Paravatahs,  will  be  the  greatest  of  ascetics,  if  in 
Devalokahs,  will  be  an  ascetic,  holding  a  cudgel  (Lagudi),  or  he  will  be  a  religious  mendicant, 
that  has  renounced  all  mundane  attachments  and  carrying  three  long  staves,  tied  together,  in 
his  right  hand  (Tridandin)  and,  if  in  Brahmalokahs,  will  perform  Aswamedh  Yagya  (Horse 
Sacrifice)  and  will  attain  the  state  of  Lord  Indra,  if  in  Iravatahs,  will  be  a  synonym  of  Dharma, 
or  virtues  just,  as  Lord  Ram  and  Yudhishtira. 

28.  Lords  of  Kendras  and  Konas  Related.  The  Kendras  are  known,  as  Vishnu  Sthanas  (Bhavas 
of  Lord  Vishnu),  while  the  Konas  are  called  Lakshmi  Sthanas.  If  the  Lord  of  a  Kendr 
establishes  a  relationship  with  the  Lord  of  a  Kon,  a  Raj  Yog  is  obtained. 

(A  sixth  kind  of  relationship  can  also  be  extended  in  this  context  to  Navahs  positions,  though 
there  is  no  specific  classic  sanction  for  this.  For  example  in  the  case  of  a  Makar  native  Mangal 
in  the  Navahs  of  Sukr  and  Sukr  in  the  Navahs  of  Mangal  will  confer  a  superior  Raj  Yog.  This 
form  of  relationship  will  be  equally  superior,  like  the  first  3  relationships,  mentioned  in  the 
earlier  paragraph). 


29-34  Effects  of  the  Divisional  Dignities  of  Related  Lords  of  Kendras  and  Lords  of  Konas.  If 
the  Lord  of  a  Kendr  and  the  Lord  of  a  Kon,  having  a  relationship,  as  indicated  in  Sloka  28, 
happen  to  be  in  Parijatahs,  the  native  will  be  king  and  will  protect  men,  if  in  Uttamahs,  will  be 
an  excellent  king,  endowed  with  elephants,  horses,  chariots  etc.,  if  in  Gopurahs,  will  be  a  tiger 
of  kings,  honoured  by  other  kings  and,  if  in  Simhasanahs,  will  be  an  emperor,  ruling  over  the 
entire  earth.  With  the  said  Raj  Yog  relationship  of  the  said  Grahas  in  Simhasanahs  were  born 
Harish  Candr,  Manu,  Bali,  Agni  Deva  and  many  emperors.  In  the  present  Yuga  so  born  is 
Yudhishtira  (Dharm  Raj  of  Mahabharat).  Salivahana's  birth  and  that  of  others  will  also  come 
with  this  Yog.  With  such  Lords,  placed  in  Paravatahs,  Manu  etc.  were  born.  The  Incarnations 
of  Lord  Vishnu  took  place,  when  such  Lords  were  placed  in  Devalokahs.  With  such  Lords, 
placed  in  Brahmalokahs,  Lord  Brahma  was  born  and,  placed  in  Iravatahs,  the  Swayambhu 
Manu  was  born.  (Manu  is  the  first  of  the  14  Manus,  identified,  as  the  second  creator,  who 
produced  the  Prajapatis.  To  Manu  the  code  of  laws,  Manu  Smriti  is  ascribed). 

Ch.  42.  Combinations  for  Penury 

1.  O  Lord,  you  have  stated  many  Yogas,  related  to  acquisition  of  wealth.  Please  tell  me  such 
Yogas,  causing  utter  poverty. 

2.  The  native  will  be  penniless,  if  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Vyaya  Bhava,  while  Vyaya's  Lord  is  in 
Lagn  along  with  the  Lord  of  a  Marak,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  such  a  Grah. 

3.  The  native  will  be  penniless,  if  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Ari  Bhava,  while  Ari's  Lord  is  in  Lagn, 
yuti  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  a  Marak  Lord. 

4.  Should  Lagn,  or  Candr  be  with  Ketu,  while  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  person 
concerned  will  be  penniless. 

5.  If  Lagn's  Lord  along  with  a  malefic  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  while  Dhan's  Lord 
is  in  an  enemy's  Rasi,  or  in  debilitation,  even  a  native  of  royal  scion  will  become  penniless. 

6.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  yuti  with  the  Lord  of  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  or  with  Sani  and,  if 
Lagn's  Lord  is  devoid  of  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  the  native  will  be  penniless. 

7.  Should  Putr's  and  Dharm' s  Lords  be,  respectively,  found  in  Ari  and  Vyaya  Bhava  and 
receive  a  Drishti  from  Marak  Grahas,  the  native  will  be  penniless. 

8.  If  malefics,  excepting  the  Lords  of  Karm  and  Dharm  Bhava,  happen  to  be  in  Lagn, 
associated  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Marak  Grahas,  one  will  become  penniless. 

9.  Note  the  Grahas,  that  are  ruling  the  Rasis,  occupied  by  the  Lords  of  Ari,  Randhr  and  Vyaya 
Bhava.  If  the  said  dispositors  are  in  such  evil  Bhavas  in  turn  and  are  associated  with,  or 
receive  a  Drishti  from  malefics,  the  native  will  be  miserable  and  indigent. 

10.  The  Lord  of  the  Navahs,  occupied  by  Candr,  joining  a  Marak  Grah,  or  occupying  a  Marak 
Bhava,  will  make  one  penniless. 

11.  Should  the  Lord  of  the  natal  Lagn  and  that  of  the  Navahs  Lagn  be  yuti  with,  or  receive  a 
Drishti  from  Marak  Grahas,  one  will  be  penniless. 


12.  If  inauspicious  Bhavas  are  occupied  by  benefics,  while  auspicious  Bhavas  are  occupied  by 
malefics,  the  native  will  be  indigent  and  will  be  distressed  even  in  the  matter  of  food. 

13.  A  Grah,  associated  with  one  of  the  Lords  of  Ari,  Randhr  and  Vyaya  Bhava,  being  bereft  of 
a  Drishti  from  the  Lord  of  a  Kon,  will  in  its  Dasha  periods  cause  harm  to  the  native's  financial 
aspects. 

14.  If  the  8*  /12l  from  Atma  Karak,  or  Randhr/Vyaya  Bhava  receive  a  Drishti  from  the  Atma 
Karak' s  Navahs  Lord  and  the  Lord  of  Janma  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  wealth. 

15.  The  native  will  be  a  spendthrift,  if  the  12l  from  Atma  Karak  receives  a  Drishti  from  the 
dispositor  of  Atma  Karak,  or,  if  Vyaya  Bhava  receives  a  Drishti  from  the  Lord  of  Lagn. 

16-18.  Now  I  tell  you  some  Yogas  for  poverty  along  with  conditions  of  their  nullifications. 
Should  Mangal  and  Sani  be  together  in  Dhan  Bhava,  the  native's  wealth  will  be  destroyed. 
Should  Budh  give  a  Drishti  to  Mangal  and  Sani  in  Dhan  Bhava,  there  will  be  great  wealth. 
There  is  no  doubt  in  it.  Surya  in  Dhan  Bhava,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Sani,  will  cause 
penury,  while,  if  Surya  is  in  Dhan  Bhava  and  does  not  receive  a  Drishti  from  Sani,  riches  and 
fame  will  be  obtained.  The  same  effects  (poverty)  will  be  declared,  if  Sani  is  in  Dhan  Bhava, 
receiving  a  Drishti  from  Surya. 

Ch.  43.  Longevity 

1.  O  Maharishi  Parashar,  you  have  dealt  with  combinations  for  wealth  and  poverty.  Kindly 
detail  methods  of  ascertaining  the  life-span  of  human  beings. 

2-3.  O  Brahmin,  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  I  narrate  methods  of  ascertaining  longevity. 
Knowing  that  longevity  is  difficult  even  for  gods.  Many  exponents  have  laid  down  various 
methods  of  longevity  calculations.  Following  is  the  summary  of  such  schools  of  thought. 

4-8.  Pindayu.  The  Grahas  contribute  to  longevity,  according  to  their  being  in  exaltation,  or 
debilitation  and  also  based  on  their  strengths  and  weaknesses  and  positions  in  Ashvini  etc.  and 
in  the  various  Rasis.  First  of  all  Pindayu  is  based  on  the  positions  of  the  Grahas.  O  Brahmin, 
listen  carefully  to  what  I  say:  19,  25,  15,  12,  15,  21  and  20  are  the  number  of  years, 
contributed  by  the  Grahas,  from  Surya  etc.,  when  in  exaltation.  These  are  half  of  the  above  in 
debilitation.  And,  if  the  Grahas  are  in  between  exaltation  and  debilitation,  the  rule  of  three 
process  should  be  used.  Deduct  the  actual  position  of  the  Grah  from  its  deep  exaltation  point. 
If  the  product  is  less  than  6  Rasis,  deduct  it  again  from  12  Rasis.  The  product  concerned 
should  be  multiplied  by  the  number  of  years  allotted  to  the  Grah  and  divided  by  12  to  get  the 
Grah's  actual  contribution. 

9.  Rectifications.  Excepting  Sukr  and  Sani,  the  contributions,  made  by  others,  should  be 
halved,  if  they  are  eclipsed  by  Surya.  One  third  should  be  reduced,  if  the  Grah  is  in  its 
inimical  Rasi.  This  does  not  apply  to  the  one  in  retrogression  (see  Vakra  Charam). 

10-11.  Deductions  for  Grahas  in  the  Visible  Half  of  the  Zodiac.  Full,  half,  one  third,  one 
fourth,  one  fifth  and  one  sixth  are  the  deductions  of  contributions,  made  by  malefics,  placed  in 
the  visible  half  of  the  zodiac.  Benefics  in  such  cases  lose  only  half  of  what  malefics  lose. 
Should  there  be  more  than  one  Grah  in  a  Bhava,  the  deduction,  due  to  the  strongest,  will  only 


prevail  and  not  deductions,  due  to  other  Grahas  in  that  particular  Bhava.  Waning  Candr  is  a 
benefic  for  this  purpose. 

12-13.  Malefics  in  Lagn.  In  case  Tanu  Bhava  is  occupied  by  malefics,  adopt  the  following 
procedure.  Convert  Lagn's  Sphuta  into  minutes  of  arc  and  multiply  it  by  the  years  etc., 
contributed  by  the  occupant,  and  divide  by  21600.  The  years  etc.  so  arrived  be  deducted  from 
the  respective  contribution,  which  will  be  the  net  span,  donated  by  the  Grah.  If  there  is 
benefic' s  Drishti  on  Lagn,  containing  malefics,  then  the  loss  is  only  half. 

14-15.  Lagn's  Contribution.  The  number  of  years,  contributed  by  Lagn,  will  correspond  to  the 
number  of  Rasis  it  gained  (from  Mesh),  while  the  degrees  Lagn  has  gained  in  the  particular 
Rasi  will  also  correspondingly  donate  (30°  =  1  year).  If  the  Lagn's  Lord  in  the  Navahs  is 
stronger  than  Lagn's  Lord,  then  the  contribution  should  be  computed  only  based  on  the 
number  of  Navahsas  gained  (from  Mesh),  otherwise  the  computation  will  be  for  the  Rasi 
Lagn. 

16-17.  Nisargayu.  O  Brahmin,  now  I  tell  you  about  Nisargayu.  1,  2,  9,  20,  18,  20  and  50  are 
the  years,  allotted  to  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Sukr,  Guru,  Surya  and  Sani  from  the  period  of 
birth. 

18-19.  Ahsayu.  Now  I  will  tell  you  about  Ahsayu  contributions  by  Lagn  and  Grahas.  The 
years  correspond  to  the  number  of  Navahsas,  counted  from  Mesh.  Multiply  the  longitude  in 
question  by  108.  If  the  product  exceeds  12,  expunge  multiples  of  12  and  consider  the  final 
product  in  Rasis,  degrees  etc.,  as  years,  months  etc. 

20-22.  The  same  reductions,  as  per  Pindayu,  apply  to  Ahsayu  as  well;  i.e.  half  for  a  combust 
Grah,  one  third  for  inimical  placement  and  the  ones,  due  for  placements  in  the  half  of  the 
zodiac,  counted  from  the  12*  backwards.  Some  scholars  suggest  further  corrections  for 
Ahsayu,  viz.  to  increase  threefold  the  contribution  of  a  Grah  in  exaltation,  or  in  own  Bhava 
and  double  the  contribution,  if  the  contributor  is  in  his  own  Navahs,  or  in  his  own  Dreshkan. 
If  doubling  and  trebling  is  warranted,  only  trebling  be  done.  In  case  of  reductions  also  only 
halving  is  to  be  done,  if  both  halving  and  reducing  a  third  are  required.  That  is  how  the  final 
life-span  of  men  be  understood. 

23.  Longevity  for  Other  Living  Beings.  For  other  living  beings  as  well  such  computations  can 
be  made.  The  said  figure  should  be  multiplied  by  the  figure,  corresponding  to  its  full  span  of 
life  and  divided  by  the  figure,  corresponding  to  the  full  span  of  life  for  human  beings. 

24-29.  Full  Life  Span  of  Various  Living  Beings.  Now  I'll  tell  you  about  the  full  life-span 
figures  for  various  living  beings.  Gods  and  sages  enjoy  endless  life-span  (in  astronomical 
proportions,  as  against  ordinary  mortals).  The  full  life-span  of  eagles,  owls,  parrots,  crows  and 
snakes  is  one  thousand  years.  For  falcon,  monkey,  bear  and  frog  the  full  span  of  life  is  300 
years.  Demon's  full  life-span  is  150  years,  while  it  is  120  for  human  beings,  32  for  horses,  25 
for  donkeys  and  camels,  24  for  oxen  and  buffaloes,  20  for  peacocks,  16  for  goats  and  rams.  14 
for  swans,  12  for  cuckoo,  dog  and  dove,  8  for  hens  etc.  and  7  for  birds  etc. 

30-31.  Choice  of  Longevity.  I  have  narrated  3  different  methods  of  longevity.  Listen  to  me 
about  the  choice  among  the  three  systems.  According  to  which  of  the  three,  Lagn,  Surya,  or 
Candr  is  stronger  than  the  other  two,  Ahsayu,  Pindayu,  or  Nisargayu  should  be,  respectively, 
chosen. 


32.  Doubtful  Cases.  If  two  among  Lagn,  Surya  and  Candr  gain  equal  strength,  then  longevity 
should  be  worked  out,  as  per  both  systems  and  the  average  of  both  should  be  considered.  If  all 
the  three  are  equally  strong,  the  average  of  the  three  should  be  considered. 

33-40.  Other  Clues  to  Longevity.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  I  will  now  give  you  details  of 
other  methods  in  the  matter  of  longevity,  as  under.  This  is  based  on  the  positions  of  Lagn' s 
Lord,  Randhr's  Lord,  Sani,  Candr,  natal  Lagn  and  Hora  Lagn.  These  six  are  grouped  into 
three  groups  thus:  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and  of  Randhr  Bhava  on  the  one  hand,  Sani  and  Candr 
on  the  other  hand  and  the  natal  Lagn  and  Hora  Lagn  on  yet  the  other  hand.  Out  of  a  group  of 
two,  if  the  two  are  in  Movable  Rasis,  long  life  is  denoted.  One  in  a  Fixed  Rasi  and  the  other  in 
a  Dual  Rasi  will  also  bestow  long  life.  One  in  a  Movable  Rasi  and  the  other  in  a  Fixed  Rasi 
will  give  medium  life.  If  both  are  in  Dual  Rasis,  then  again  medium  life  will  be  obtained. 
Short  life  is  denoted,  if  one  is  in  a  Movable  Rasi,  as  the  other  is  in  a  Dual  Rasi,  or,  if  both  are 
in  Fixed  Rasis.  The  type  of  life,  denoted  by  three,  or  two  groups  be  only  considered.  If  the 
three  groups  denote  different  scales,  then  the  one,  indicated  by  the  pair  of  natal  Lagn  and 
Hora  Lagn  should  be  only  considered.  In  case  of  three  different  indications,  if  Candr  is  in 
Lagn,  or  Yuvati  Bhava,  then  the  one,  indicated  by  the  Sani-Candr  pair  will  only  come  to  pass. 

41-44.  Further  Clarifications.  If  long  life  is  denoted  by  all  the  said  three  groups,  the  span  is 
120  years,  if  by  two  groups,  it  is  108  years  and,  if  only  by  one  group  it  is  91  years.  If  medium 
life  is  arrived  at  by  three  groups,  it  is  80  years,  if  indicated  by  2  groups,  it  is  72  years  and,  if 
by  one  group,  it  is  64  years.  If  short  life  is  denoted  by  the  said  three  groups,  it  is  only  32 
years,  if  indicated  by  two  groups,  the  life-span  is  36  years  and,  if  by  one  group,  the  life-span 
is  40  years.  These  are  rectified,  as  under. 

45-46.  Rectifications.  If  the  contributor  is  in  the  beginning  of  a  Rasi,  his  donation  will  be  full 
and  it  will  be  nil,  if  he  is  at  the  end  of  a  Rasi.  For  intermediary  placements  rule  of  three 
process  will  apply.  Add  the  longitudes  of  the  contributors  and  the  sum  so  arrived  at  must  be 
divided  by  the  number  of  contributors.  The  latest  product  should  be  multiplied  by  the  number 
of  basic  years  and  divided  by  30.  This  will  yield  the  net  longevity. 

47.  Special  Rule  for  Sani.  Should  Sani  be  a  contributor,  the  class  of  longevity  declines.  Some 
advocate  contrarily  an  increase  of  class  in  this  context.  If  Sani  is  in  its  own  Rasi,  or  in 
exaltation,  change  in  class  will  not  occur.  Even,  if  he  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  yuti  with 
only  a  malefic,  no  change  occurs. 

48.  Special  Rule  for  Guru.  If  Guru  is  in  Lagn,  or  in  Yuvati  Bhava  and  receives  a  Drishti  from, 
or  is  yuti  with  only  benefics,  the  class  of  longevity  will  increase. 

49-50.  Increase  and  Fall  in  Class  of  Longevity.  From  very  short  life  to  short  life,  from  short 
life  to  medium  life,  from  medium  life  to  long  life  and  from  long  life  to  extremely  long  life  are 
the  increases  in  the  classification  of  longevity,  when  Guru  warrants  an  increase.  The  reverse  is 
true,  if  Sani  warrants  a  fall  in  the  span  of  life. 

5 1 .  (Maitreya  says)  You  have  narrated  various  kinds  of  longevity  computations.  Please  favour 
me  by  denoting  subtle  classes  thereof  and  poor  and  long  life-spans. 

52.  (Maharishi  Parashar  replies)  These  are  seven-fold,  viz.  Bal  Risht,  Yog  Risht,  short, 
medium,  long,  super-natural  (Divya)  and  immortality  (Amritayu). 


53-54.  The  life-span  in  Bal  Risht  is  8  years,  in  Yog  Risht  20  years,  in  short,  medium  and  long 
lives,  respectively,  32,  64  and  120  years.  Super-natural  life-span  is  1000  years.  Above  this 
super-natural  life-span  of  1000  years  it  is  Amritayu,  which  can  be  acquired  only  by  those, 
who  deserve  it. 

55.  Limitless  Longevity.  Should  Kark  be  Lagn  with  Guru  and  Candr  therein,  while  Sukr  and 
Budh  are  in  Kendras  and  others  are  in  Sahaj,  Ari  and  Labh  Bhava,  the  native  will  obtain 
limitless  longevity. 

56.  Super-Natural  Longevity.  One  having  benefics  in  Kendras  and/or  Konas,  while  malefics 
are  in  Sahaj,  Ari  and  Labh  Bhava  will  obtain  super-natural  life-span.  Randhr  Bhava  in  this 
case  should  be  one  of  the  Rasis,  owned  by  a  benefic. 

57.  Living  until  the  End  of  the  Yuga.  One  born  in  Kark  Lagn  will  live  till  the  end  of  the  Yuga, 
if  Guru  is  in  a  Kendr  and  happens  to  be  in  Gopurahs,  while  Sukr  is  in  a  Kon  and  happens  to 
be  in  Paravatahs. 

58.  Living  the  Life-Span  of  a  Sage.  Guru  in  Simhasanahs,  being  in  Lagn,  Sani  in  Devalokahs 
and  Mangal  in  Paravatahs.  If  these  are  so,  one  will  enjoy  the  life-span,  as  due  to  a  sage. 

59.  Good  Yogas  increase  the  life-span  and  bad  Yogas  decrease  the  same.  Hence  I  tell  you 
such  Yogas,  as  to  know  of  full,  medium  and  short  span  combinations. 

60.  If  a  Kendr  contains  a  benefic,  while  Lagn's  Lord  is  yuti  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a 
benefic,  or  Guru  in  particular,  the  native  will  live  a  full  span  of  life. 

61 .  Should  Lagn's  Lord  be  in  a  Kendr  yuti  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Guru  and  Sukr, 
full  life-span  will  result. 

62.  If  at  birth  three  Grahas  are  exalted,  out  of  which  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and  Randhr  Bhava  are 
inclusive,  as  Randhr  Bhava  is  devoid  of  a  malefic  in  it,  full  life-span  will  result. 

63.  Long  life  is  denoted,  if  three  Grahas  are  in  Randhr  Bhava,  in  exaltation,  own,  or  friendly 
divisions,  while  Lagn's  Lord  is  strong. 

64.  If  Sani,  or  Lagn's  Lord  is  yuti  with  any  exalted  Grah,  long  life  will  result. 

65.  Long  life  will  be  enjoyed,  if  malefics  are  in  Sahaj,  Ari  and  Labh  Bhava,  while  benefics  are 
in  Kendras. 

66.  If  Ari,  Yuvati  and  Randhr  Bhava  are  occupied  by  benefics,  while  malefics  are  in  Sahaj 
and  Labh  Bhava,  full  life-span  will  follow  the  birth. 

67.  If  Randhr' s  Lord  is  friendly  to  Surya,  while  malefics  are  in  Ari  and  Vyaya  Bhava,  as 
Lagn's  Lord  is  in  a  Kendr,  the  native  will  live  the  full  span  of  life. 

68.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  if  a  malefic  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  while  Karm's  Lord  is 
exalted,  one  will  be  long-lived. 


69.  Long  life  will  follow,  if  Lagn  is  a  Dual  Rasi,  while  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in 
exaltation,  or  in  a  Kon. 

70.  Should  Lagn  be  a  Dual  Rasi,  while  two  malefics  are  in  a  Kendr  with  reference  to  a  strong 
Lagn's  Lord,  long  life  is  indicated. 

71-73.  If  the  stronger  among  Lagn's  Lord  and  Randhr's  Lord  is  placed  in  a  Kendr,  long  life  is 
indicated  and,  if  in  a  Panaphara,  medium  life  is  indicated,  if  in  Apoklima,  short  life  will  come 
to  pass.  According  to  Lagn's  Lord  being  friendly,  neutral,  or  inimical  to  Surya,  long,  medium, 
or  short  life  will  result. 

74.  Should  Mangal  and  Sahaj's  Lord,  or  Randhr's  Lord  and  Sani  be  combust,  or  be  yuti  with 
malefics,  or  receive  a  Drishti  from  malefics,  there  will  be  short  life. 

75.  If  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  yuti  with  malefics  and  devoid  of  Yuti 
with  and/or  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  short  life  will  come  to  pass. 

76.  If  malefics  are  in  Kendras,  devoid  of  Yuti  with,  or  a  Drishti  from  benefics,  while  Lagn's 
Lord  is  not  strong,  only  short  life  will  result. 

77.  O  excellent  of  Brahmins,  if  Vyaya  and  Dhan  Bhava  are  occupied  by  malefics  and  devoid 
of  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  or  of  Yuti  with  a  benefic,  the  native  will  be  short-lived. 

78.  If  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and  Randhr  Bhava  are  bereft  of  dignities  and  strength,  short  life  will 
come  to  pass.  If  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and  Randhr  Bhava  are  helped  by  others,  while  being  so, 
medium  life-span  will  come  to  pass. 

Ch.  44.  Marak  Grahas 

1.  O  Maharishi  Parashar,  you  have  mentioned  a  lot  about  longevity.  Be  kind  enough  to  throw 
light  on  Marakas,  or  killers. 


2-5.  O  Brahmin,  Sahaj  and  Randhr  Bhava  are  the  two  Bhavas  of  longevity.  The  Bhavas, 

related  t 

Bhavas. 


related  to  death,  are  the  12th  from  each  of  these,  i.e.  Dhan  and  Yuvati  Bhava  are  Marak 


3.  Out  of  the  two,  Dhan  Bhava  is  a  powerful  Marak  Bhava.  The  Lords  of  Dhan  and  Yuvati 
Bhava,  malefics  in  Dhan  and  Yuvati  Bhava  and  malefics,  yuti  with  Dhan's  Lord  and  yuti  with 
Yuvati's  Lord  are  all  known,  as  Marakas.  The  major  and  sub-periods  of  these  Grahas  will 
bring  death  on  the  native,  depending  on  whether  he  is  a  long  life,  medium  life,  or  short  life 
person. 

6-7.  The  Dasha  of  a  benefic  Grah,  related  to  Vyaya' s  Lord  may  also  inflict  death.  End  may 
descend  on  the  native  in  Randhr's  Lord's  Dasha.  The  Dasha  of  a  Grah,  which  is  an  exclusive 
malefic,  may  also  cause  death. 

9.  Should  Sani  be  ill-disposed  and  be  related  to  a  Marak  Grah,  he  will  be  the  first  to  kill  in 
preference  to  other  Grahas. 


10-14.  O  Brahmin,  I  tell  you  further  about  Marakas.  Narrated  earlier  are  three  kinds  of  life- 
spans, viz.  short,  medium  and  long.  Short  life  is  before  32  years,  later  on  up  to  64  it  is 
medium  life  and  from  64  to  100  it  is  long  life.  Beyond  100  the  longevity  is  called  supreme.  O 
excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  it  is  impossible  to  decide  upon  longevity  till  the  native  is  20  years 
old.  Till  such  year  the  child  should  be  protected  by  sacred  recitations,  religious  offerings  (of 
Ghl  etc.)  to  consecrated  fire,  as  prescribed  in  the  Vedas  etc.  and  through  medical  treatments, 
for  premature  death  may  descend  on  the  child  due  to  sins  of  father  and  mother,  or  of  its  own 
(in  the  previous  birth). 

15-21. 1  further  mention  about  the  Marak  Grahas.  One  born  with  short  life  combinations  may 
face  death  in  the  Dasha,  denoted  by  Vipat  star  (3rd  from  the  birth  star),  one  of  medium  life 
may  die  in  the  Dasha,  denoted  by  Pratyak  star  (5th  from  the  birth  star).  In  the  Dasha,  denoted 
by  Vadh  star  (7th  from  the  birth  star),  one  with  long  life  may  obtain  his  end.  The  Dasha  of  the 
Lord  of  the  22nd  Dreshkan,  or  23rd,  or  3rd,  or  5th,  or  7th  asterisms  may  also  cause  death.  The 
Lords  of  the  2nd  and  the  12th,  counted  from  Kark,  may  bring  death.  This  is  true,  when  Candr  is 
a  malefic.  If  he  happens  to  be  a  benefic,  there  will  be  diseases  (not  death).  Death  may  come  to 
pass  in  the  Dasha  of  Ari's  Lord  and  in  the  subperiods  of  Ari's,  Randhr's  and/or  Vyaya's 
Lords.  Should  there  be  many  Marakas  and,  if  these  Marakas  are  strong,  there  will  be  diseases, 
miseries  etc.  in  major  and  sub-periods.  Thus  these  are  Marakas  and  are  primarily  related  to 
bring  death  upon  the  native.  According  to  their  dispositions  there  may  be  death,  or  difficulties. 

22-24.  Rahu  and  Ketu,  as  Marakas.  If  Rahu,  or  Ketu  are  placed  in  Tanu,  Yuvati,  Randhr,  or 
Vyaya  Bhava,  or  happen  to  be  in  the  7th  from  a  Marak  Lord,  or  are  placed  with  such  a  Grah, 
they  acquire  powers  of  killing  in  their  major,  or  sub-periods.  For  one  born  in  Makar,  or  in 
Vrischik,  Rahu  will  be  a  Marak.  Should  Rahu  be  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  he  will  give 
difficulties  in  his  Dasha  periods.  He  will  not,  however,  do  so,  if  Rahu  receives  a  Drishti  from, 
or  is  yuti  with  a  benefic. 

25-31.  Sahaj  Bhava  and  Death.  O  excellent  of  Brahmins,  if  Surya,  being  with  strength,  is  in 
Sahaj  Bhava,  one  will  obtain  his  death,  due  to  a  king  (legal  punishments).  Candr  in  Sahaj 
Bhava  will  cause  death,  due  to  tuberculosis,  while  wounds,  weapons,  fire  and  thirst  will  cause 
death  through  Mangal  in  Sahaj  Bhava.  If  Sahaj  Bhava  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  occupied 
by  Sani  and  Rahu,  death  will  be  through  poison,  water,  or  fire,  or  fall  from  heights,  or 
confinement.  Death  will  surely  come  to  descend  through  insects,  or  leprosy,  if  Candr  and 
Gulik  occupy,  or  give  a  Drishti  to  Sahaj  Bhava.  Budh,  giving  a  Drishti  to,  or  occupying  Sahaj 
Bhava,  will  bring  death,  followed  by  fever.  Guru  in  Sahaj  Bhava,  or  giving  a  Drishti  to  Sahaj 
Bhava,  will  cause  death  by  swelling,  or  tumours.  Urinary  diseases  will  cause  death,  if  Sukr  is 
in,  or  gives  a  Drishti  to  Sahaj  Bhava.  Many  Grahas,  giving  a  Drishti  to,  or  occupying  Sahaj 
Bhava,  will  bring  death  through  many  diseases. 

32.  If  Sahaj  Bhava  is  occupied  by  a  benefic,  death  will  be  in  an  auspicious  place  (like  a 
shrine)  and,  if  Sahaj  Bhava  is  occupied  by  a  malefic,  death  will  be  in  sinful  places.  Mixed 
occupation  of  Sahaj  Bhava  will  yield  mixed  results  with  regard  to  the  place  of  death. 

33.  Consciousness  will  prevail  at  the  time  of  death,  if  Guru,  or  Sukr  are  placed  in  Sahaj 
Bhava.  With  other  Grahas  in  Sahaj  Bhava  there  will  be  unconsciousness  before  death. 

34.  According  to  Sahaj  Bhava  being  a  Movable,  a  Fixed,  or  a  Dual  Rasi,  death  will  be, 
respectively,  in  a  foreign  place  (other  than  native  birth  place),  in  one's  own  house,  or  on  the 
way. 


35-36.  Occupants  of  Randhr  Bhava.  Note  the  occupant  of  Randhr  Bhava.  If  it  is  Surya,  death 
will  be  through  fire,  if  Candr  is  in  Randhr  Bhava,  through  water,  if  Mangal,  through  weapons, 
if  Budh,  through  fever,  if  Guru,  through  diseases,  if  Sukr,  through  hunger  and,  if  Sani, 
through  thirst. 

37.  If  Randhr  Bhava  is  occupied  by,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  while  Dharm's  Lord 
is  yuti  with  a  benefic,  the  native  will  die  in  a  shrine.  If  Randhr  Bhava  is  occupied  by,  or 
receives  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  while  Dharm's  Lord  is  yuti  with  a  malefic,  death  will  be  in 
a  place,  other  than  a  shrine. 

38-39.  Fate  of  the  Human  Physical  System.  Should  there  be  a  benefic' s  Dreshkan  in  Randhr 
Bhava  (22nd  Dreshkan),  the  body  will  be  burnt  in  fire  (as  prescribed  in  Shastras).  If  a 
malefic' s  Dreshkan  happens  to  be  in  Randhr  Bhava,  the  body  will  be  thrown  away  in  water.  If 
the  Dreshkan  in  Randhr  Bhava  is  owned  by  a  mixed  Grah,  the  dead  body  will  only  dry  up.  If 
the  Dreshkan  in  Randhr  Bhava  is  a  serpent  Dreshkan,  the  body  will  be  eaten  away  by  animals, 
crows  etc. 

40.  Serpent  Dreshkanas.  The  2n  and  3r  Dreshkan  in  Kark,  the  initial  one  in  Vrischik  and  the 
last  one  in  Meen  are  designated,  as  serpent  Dreshkanas. 

41-42.  Pre-natal  Abode.  O  excellent  of  Brahmins,  the  stronger  of  the  two  luminaries,  Surya 
and  Candr,  occupying  a  Dreshkan  of  Guru,  denotes  the  descent  from  the  world  of  gods.  If  the 
stronger  of  the  luminaries  occupies  the  Dreshkan  of  Sukr,  or  Candr,  the  descent  is  from  the 
world  of  the  Manes,  if  the  stronger  of  the  two  luminaries  is  in  the  Dreshkan  of  Surya,  or 
Mangal,  the  descent  is  from  the  world  of  Yama  (world  of  the  death)  and,  if  in  Dreshkan  of 
Budh,  or  Sani,  the  descent  is  from  the  hell. 

43-45.  Ascent  after  Death.  According  to  the  following  Grahas  in  Vyaya,  Yuvati,  Ari,  or 
Randhr  Bhava,  the  native  will  attain  one  of  the  different  worlds  after  death:  Guru  heaven, 
Candr,  or  Sukr  the  world  of  Manes,  Mangal  and/or  Surya  earth  (rebirth),  Budh  and/or  Sani 
hell.  In  case  the  said  Bhavas  are  not  occupied,  the  native  will  go  to  the  world,  indicated  by  the 
stronger  of  the  Dreshkan  Lords,  related  to  Ari  and  Randhr  Bhava.  The  relative  Grah's 
exaltation  etc.  will  denote  the  high,  medium  and  low  status  the  native  will  obtain  in  the  said 
world. 

46.  Other  Grahas  and  Rasis,  becoming  Marakas,  are  being  discussed  in  the  chapter,  related  to 
Dashas. 

Ch.  45.  Avasthas  of  Grahas 

1.  O  Maharishi  Parashar,  you  have  earlier  stated,  that  the  Avasthas,  or  states  of  the  Grahas  are 
to  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  effects  of  the  Grahas.  Be  so  kind  to  tell  me  about  this. 

2.  O  excellent  of  Brahmins,  various  kinds  of  Avasthas  of  the  Grahas  have  been  expounded. 
Out  of  these,  I  will  give  you  the  summary  of  Baal  (infant)  and  other  states  of  the  Grahas. 

3.  Baal,  Kumar,  Yuv,  Vriddh  and  Mrit  Avastha  (Baal  Adi  Avasthas).  Infant,  youthful, 
adolescent,  old  and  dead  are  the  states  of  the  Grahas,  placed  in  the  ascending  order  at  the  rate 
of  six  degrees  in  odd  Rasis.  In  the  case  of  even  Rasis  this  arrangement  is  in  reverse  order. 
(Vriddh  -  Advanced,  Mrit  -  In  extremis) 


4.  Results.  One  fourth,  half,  full,  negligible  and  nil  are  the  grades  of  the  results,  due  to  a  Grah 
in  infant,  youthful,  adolescent,  old  and  dead  Avasthas. 

5.  Awakening,  Dreaming  and  Sleeping  States.  If  a  Grah  is  in  its  own  Rasi,  or  in  exaltation,  it 
is  said  to  be  in  a  state  of  awakening  (alertness).  In  the  Rasi  of  a  friend,  or  of  a  neutral  it  is  in 
dreaming  state,  while  in  an  enemy's  Rasi,  or  in  debilitation  it  is  in  a  state  of  sleeping. 

6.  According  to  a  Grah,  being  in  Awakening,  Dreaming,  or  Sleeping  states,  the  results,  due  to 
it  will  be  full,  medium,  or  nil. 

7.  Other  Kinds  of  States.  There  are  nine  kinds  of  other  Avasthas,  viz.  Dipt,  Swasth,  Pramudit, 
Shanta,  Din,  Vikal,  Duhkhit,  Khal  and  Kop. 

8-10.  If  a  Grah  is  in  its  exaltation  Rasi,  it  is  in  Dipt  Avastha,  if  in  its  own  Rasi,  it  is  in  Swasth, 
if  in  a  great  friend's  Rasi,  it  is  in  Pramudit,  if  in  a  friendly  Rasi,  it  is  in  Shanta,  if  in  a  neutral 
Rasi,  it  is  in  Din,  if  a  Grah  is  yuti  with  a  malefic,  it  is  in  Vikal,  if  is  in  an  enemy's  Rasi,  it  is  in 
Duhkhit,  if  in  a  great  enemy's  Rasi,  it  is  in  Khal  and,  if  a  Grah  is  being  eclipsed  by  Surya,  it  is 
in  Kop.  Depending  on  such  a  state  of  the  Grah,  the  Bhava,  occupied  by  it  will  obtain 
corresponding  effects. 

11-18.  Yet  other  Avasthas.  Lajjit,  Garvit,  Kshudhit,  Trushit,  Mudit  and  Kshobhit  are  the  other 
kinds  of  Avasthas,  due  to  the  Grahas.  Placed  in  Putr  Bhava,  if  a  Grah  is  associated  with  Rahu, 
or  Ketu,  or  with  Surya,  Sani,  or  Mangal,  it  is  in  Lajjit  Avastha.  If  a  Grah  is  in  exaltation,  or  in 
Mooltrikon,  it  is  Garvit.  If  a  Grah  is  in  an  enemy's  Rasi,  or  yuti  with  an  enemy,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  an  enemy,  or  even,  if  a  Grah  is  yuti  with  Sani,  the  Avastha  is  Kshudhit.  If  a  Grah 
is  in  a  watery  Rasi  and  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  but  does  not  receive  a  Drishti  from  a 
benefic,  the  Avastha  is  called  Trushit.  If  a  Grah  is  in  a  friendly  Rasi,  or  is  yuti  with,  or 
receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  or  is  yuti  with  Guru,  it  is  said  to  be  in  Mudit  Avastha.  If  a 
Grah  is  yuti  with  Surya  and  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  yuti  with  a  malefic,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  an  enemy,  it  is  said  to  be  in  Kshobhit.  The  Bhavas,  occupied  by  a  Grah  in 
Kshudhit,  or  in  Kshobhit,  are  destroyed. 

19-23.  The  learned  should  estimate  the  effects,  due  to  a  Bhava,  in  the  manner,  cited  above, 
after  ascertaining  the  strength  and  weakness.  Weak  Grahas  cause  reduction  in  good  effects, 
while  stronger  ones  give  greater  effects.  If  a  Grah,  posited  in  Karm  Bhava,  is  in  Lajjit, 
Kshudhit  Avastha,  or  Kshobhit  Avastha,  the  person  will  always  be  subjected  to  miseries.  If  a 
Grah  in  Putr  is  in  Lajjit,  there  will  be  destruction  of  progeny,  or  there  will  be  only  one 
surviving  child.  Surely  the  wife  of  the  native  will  die,  if  there  is  a  Grah  in  Yuvati  in  Kshobhit, 
or  in  Trushit  Avastha. 

24-29.  Effects  of  Garvit,  Mudit,  Lajjit,  Kshobhit,  Kshudhit  and  Trushit  Avastha.  A  Grah  in 
Garvit  Avastha  will  cause  happiness  through  new  houses  and  gardens,  regalhood,  skill  in  arts, 
financial  gains  at  all  times  and  improvement  in  business.  A  Grah  in  Mudit  Avastha  will  give 
residences,  clothes,  ornaments,  happiness  from  lands  and  wife,  happiness  from  relatives, 
living  in  royal  places,  destruction  of  enemies  and  acquisition  of  wisdom  and  learning.  A  Grah 
in  Lajjit  will  give  aversion  to  God,  loss  of  intelligence,  loss  of  child,  interest  in  evil  speeches 
and  listlessness  in  good  things.  A  Grah  in  Kshobhit  will  give  acute  penury,  evil  disposition, 
miseries,  financial  debacles,  distress  to  feet  and  obstruction  to  income,  due  to  royal  wrath.  A 
Grah  in  Kshudhit  will  cause  downfall,  due  to  grief  and  passion,  grief  on  account  of  relatives, 
physical  decline,  troubles  from  enemies,  financial  distress,  loss  of  physical  strength  and  an 


eclipsed  mind,  due  to  miseries.  A  Grah  in  Trushit  Avastha  will  cause  diseases  through 
association  with  females,  leading  over  wicked  deeds,  loss  of  wealth,  due  to  one's  own  men, 
physical  weakness,  miseries,  caused  by  evil  people  and  decline  of  honour. 

30-37.  Calculation  of  Shayan  Adi  Avasthas.  Now  I  will  tell  you  of  the  Avasthas,  viz.  Shayan, 
Upavesan,  Netrapani,  Prakash,  Gaman,  Agaman,  Sabh,  Agam,  Bhojan,  Nritya  Lips,  Kautuk 
and  Nidr  and  the  Chesthas  of  such  Avasthas.  Note  the  number  of  the  star,  occupied  by  the 
Grah,  for  which  an  Avastha  is  to  be  calculated.  Multiply  that  number  by  the  number,  denoted 
by  the  Grah  (Surya  1  to  Sani  7).  The  figure  so  arrived  at  should  again  be  multiplied  by  the 
number  of  the  Navahs,  where  the  Grah  is  in.  Add  to  this  the  number  of  the  birth  asterism 
(ruling  star,  the  one,  occupied  by  Candr),  the  number  of  Ghatis  of  birth  and  the  number  of 
Rasis,  Lagn  gained  from  Mesh  (Mesh  1,  Vrishabh  2  and  so  forth).  This  figure  should  be 
divided  by  12  and  the  remainder  will  indicate  the  corresponding  Avastha  of  the  Grah.  The 
sub-state  in  the  said  Avastha  can  be  found  out  in  the  following  way.  Multiply  the  figure 
(Sayan  1  to  Nidr  12),  denoted  by  the  Avastha  concerned,  by  the  same  figure  and  increase  it  by 
the  figure,  denoted  by  the  Anka  value  for  the  first  syllable  of  the  native's  personal  name. 
Divide  the  product  so  obtained  by  12.  The  remainder  thereof  should  be  further  increased  by 
constant  additives  of  the  Grahas  in  the  following  way:  Surya  5,  Candr  2,  Mangal  2,  Budh  3, 
Guru  5,  Sukr  3,  Sani  3,  Rahu  (Ketu)  4.  The  product  so  arrived  at  should  be  divided  by  3.  In 
the  process  of  calculation,  if  it  happens,  that  the  remainder  is  1,  it  is  Drishti,  if  2,  it  is  Chesht 
and,  if  0,  it  is  Vichesht. 

Notes.  Shayan  Adi  are  of  supreme  importance,  as  compared  to  the  other  kinds  of  Avasthas. 

In  place  of  Navahs,  given  above,  some  translators  interpret  the  word  Ahs,  as  degree,  occupied 
by  the  Grah,  which  is  obviously  not  correct.  In  this  connection  the  reader's  attention  is  drawn 
to  Balabhadr's  Hora  Ratna,  Ch.  3,  wherein  the  author,  Balabhadr  himself,  gives  an  example 
for  Surya,  being  in  the  7th  Navahs  of  Simh  and  thus  he  considered  only  7,  as  multiplier.  He 
quotes  Adhibhut  Sagara,  as  his  authority  for  calculation  of  Sayan  Adi. 

Agaman  Avastha  is  known,  as  Gamanechch  by  some  exponents. 

Anka  value  is  1  for  a,  ka,  cha,  d  a,  dha,  bha  and  va,  2  for  i,  kha,  ja,  dha,  na,  ma  and  sha,  3  for 
u,  ga,  jha,  ta,  pa,  ya  and  sa,  4  for  e,  gha,  t  a,  tha,  pha,  ra  and  sa,  5  for  o,  ca,  tha,  da,  ba,  la  and 
ha. 

38-39.  Effects  of  Chesht  etc.  If  the  sub-state  is  Drishti  in  an  Avastha,  the  results,  being  stated 
for  the  Avastha,  will  be  medium,  the  effects  will  be  full  in  Chesht  and  negligible  in  Vichesht. 
The  good  and  bad  effects  of  Grahas  should  be  deciphered,  based  on  the  strength  and  weakness 
of  the  Grahas.  In  exaltation  the  Grahas  reveal  effects  in  a  pronounced  manner,  due  to 
Avasthas. 

40-51.  Effects  of  Surya' s  Avasthas.  If  Surya  is  in  Sayan  Avastha,  the  native  will  incur 
digestive  deficiency,  many  diseases,  stoutness  of  legs,  bilious  vitiation,  ulcer  in  the  anus  and 
heart  strokes;  if  in  Upavesan,  will  suffer  poverty,  will  carry  loads,  will  indulge  in  litigations, 
be  hard-hearted,  wicked  and  will  lose  in  his  undertakings;  if  is  in  Netrapani,  will  always  be 
happy,  wise,  helpful  to  others,  endowed  with  prowess  and  wealth,  very  happy  and  will  gain 
royal  favours;  if  in  Prakash,  will  be  liberal  in  disposition,  have  plenty  of  wealth,  be  a 
significant  speaker  in  the  assembly,  will  perform  many  meritorious  acts,  be  greatly  strong  and 
endowed  with  charming  beauty;  if  in  Gaman,  will  be  disposed  to  live  in  foreign  places,  be 


miserable,  indolent,  bereft  of  intelligence  and  wealth,  be  distressed,  due  to  fear  and  will  be 
short-tempered;  if  in  Agaman,  will  be  interested  in  others'  wives,  be  devoid  of  his  own  men, 
be  interested  in  movements  and  skilful  in  doing  evil  deeds,  be  dirty,  ill-disposed  and  will  be  a 
talebearer;  if  in  Sabh,  will  be  disposed  to  help  others,  be  always  endowed  with  wealth  and 
gems,  be  virtuous,  endowed  with  lands,  new  houses  and  robes,  be  very  strong,  very 
affectionate  to  his  friends  and  very  kindly  disposed;  if  in  Agam,  will  be  distressed,  due  to 
enemies,  fickle-minded,  evil-minded,  emaciated,  devoid  of  virtuous  acts  and  intoxicated  with 
pride;  if  in  Bhojan,  will  experience  pains  in  joints,  will  lose  money  on  account  of  others' 
females,  will  have  strength,  declining  off  and  on,  be  untruthful,  will  incur  head-aches,  eat 
remnant  food  and  will  take  to  bad  ways;  if  in  Nritya  Lips,  will  be  honoured  by  the  learned,  be 
a  scholar,  will  have  knowledge  of  poetry  etc.  and  will  be  adored  by  kings  on  the  earth;  if  is 
Kautuk,  will  always  be  happy,  will  be  endowed  with  Vedic  Knowledge  and  will  perform 
Yagyas,  will  move  amidst  kings,  have  fear  from  enemies,  will  be  charming-faced  and  be 
endowed  with  knowledge  of  poetry;  if  in  Nidr,  will  have  a  strong  tendency  towards  being 
drowsy,  will  live  in  foreign  (distant)  places,  will  incur  harm  to  his  wife  and  will  face  financial 
destruction.  Surya  in  Upavesan  will  make  one  an  artisan,  black  in  complexion,  devoid  of 
learning  and  miserable.  One  will  serve  others.  In  Netrapani  there  will  be  all  kinds  of 
happiness,  if  Surya  is  in  Putr,  Dharm,  Karm,  or  Yuvati.  In  other  Bhavas  Netrapani  of  Surya 
will  give  eye  diseases  and  enmity  with  all.  If  Surya  is  in  Prakash,  the  native  will  be 
meritorious,  religious  and  liberal,  will  enjoy  pleasures,  be  equal  to  a  prince  and  will  enjoy  the 
status  of  Kuber,  the  God  of  wealth.  However,  the  Prakash  of  Surya,  placed  in  Yuvati,  or  Putr 
will  cause  loss  of  the  first  child  and  will  produce  many  litigations.  If  Surya  is  in  Gaman,  the 
native  will  incur  disease  of  the  feet  and  will  be  very  mean.  If  in  Agaman,  Surya  in  Vyaya,  or 
in  Yuvati  will  destroy  progeny  and  will  give  very  limited  wealth.  If  in  Agam,  Surya  will  give 
many  miseries,  an  ugly  appearance  and  foolishness.  However,  he  will  give  wealth.  Surya  in 
Bhojan  in  Dharm  will  cause  many  hindrances  to  spiritual  and  religious  undertakings.  In  other 
Bhavas  Surya  in  Bhojan  will  cause  head  and  ear  diseases,  apart  from  joint  pains.  Though 
Maharishi  Parashar  states,  that  the  native  with  Surya  in  Kautuk  Avastha  will  have  fear  from 
enemies,  Bal  Bhadr  exempts  such  evil  effect  for  the  Ari  Bhava  position.  Surya  in  Kautuk  in 
other  Bhavas  will  give  a  number  of  daughters,  two  wives,  itch,  excellence,  liberality  etc.  If 
Surya  is  in  Nidr,  the  native  will  be  predisposed  to  incur  piles  and  elephantiasis,  will 
experience  a  lack  of  peace  and  he  will  be  liable  to  lose  his  first  child. 

52-63.  Effects  of  Candr's  Avasthas.  If  Candr  is  in  Sayan,  the  native  will  be  honourable, 
sluggish,  given  to  sexual  lust  and  he  will  face  financial  destruction;  if  in  Upavesan,  will  be 
troubled  by  diseases,  be  dull-witted,  not  endowed  with  mentionable  wealth,  will  be  hard- 
hearted, will  do  unworthy  acts  and  will  steal  others'  wealth;  if  in  Netrapani,  will  be  troubled 
by  great  diseases  (long  lasting  in  nature),  be  very  garrulous,  wicked  and  will  indulge  in  bad 
deeds.  Should  Candr  be  in  Prakash,  the  native  will  be  famous  in  the  world,  will  have  his 
virtues  exposed  through  royal  patronage,  will  be  surrounded  by  horses,  elephants,  females  and 
ornaments,  will  visit  shrines.  If  Candr  is  in  Gaman  with  decreasing  rays,  the  native  will  be 
sinful,  cruel  and  always  troubled  by  afflictions  of  sight.  If  Candr  is  in  Gaman  with  increasing 
rays,  the  native  will  be  distressed,  due  to  fear.  If  Candr  is  in  Agaman,  the  native  will  be 
honourable,  will  suffer  diseases  of  the  feet,  will  secretly  indulge  in  sinful  acts,  will  be  poor 
and  devoid  of  intelligence  and  happiness;  if  in  Sabh,  will  be  eminent  among  men,  honoured 
by  kings  and  kings  of  kings,  will  be  very  beautiful,  will  subdue  the  passion  of  women  and  will 
be  skilful  in  sexual  acts,  will  be  virtuous;  if  in  Agam,  will  be  garrulous  and  virtuous  and,  if  the 
said  Candr  is  of  dark  fortnight,  the  native  will  have  two  wives,  he  will  be  sick,  highly  wicked 
and  violent;  if  in  Bhojan,  will  be  endowed  with  honour,  conveyances,  attendants,  social  status, 
wife  and  daughters,  provided  Candr  is  Full  'Purna';  if  in  Bhojan  and  is  of  dark  fortnight, 


auspicious  effects  will  fail  to  come;  if  in  Nritya  Lips  and  is  endowed  with  (fortnightly) 
strength,  will  be  strong,  will  have  knowledge  of  songs  and  will  be  a  critic  of  beauty  of  things; 
if  in  Nritya  Lips  and  of  dark  fortnight,  i.e.  not  endowed  with  strength,  the  person  will  be 
sinful;  if  in  Kautuk,  the  native  will  attain  kingship,  lordship  over  wealth  and  skill  in  sexual 
acts  and  in  sporting  with  harlots.  Should  waxing  Candr,  being  yuti  with  Guru,  be  in  Nidr,  the 
native  will  be  quite  eminent.  If  waxing  Candr  is  in  Nidr,  but  devoid  of  Guru's  Yuti,  the  native 
will  lose  his  wealth  on  account  of  females  and  female  jackals  will  be  crying  around  his  abode 
(as  though  it  were  a  cemetery). 

64  75.  Effects  of  the  Avasthas  of  Mangal.  If  Mangal  is  in  Sayan,  the  native  will  be  troubled  by 
wounds,  itch  and  ulcer.  If  Mangal  is  placed  in  Upavesan,  the  native  will  be  strong,  sinful, 
untruthful,  eminent,  wealthy  and  bereft  of  virtues.  If  Mangal  is  placed  in  Lagn  and  happens  to 
be  in  Netrapani,  there  will  be  penury;  if  placed  in  other  Bhavas,  Netrapani  will  confer 
rulership  of  a  city.  Should  Mangal  be  in  Prakash,  the  native  will  shine  with  virtues  and  will  be 
honoured  by  the  king.  Mangal  in  Prakash  in  Putr  will  cause  loss  of  children  and  of  wife.  If 
Mangal  is  in  Prakash  in  Putr  and  happens  to  be  there  with  Rahu,  a  severe  (positional)  fall  will 
descend  on  the  native.  Should  Mangal  be  in  Gaman,  the  native  will  be  always  roaming,  will 
have  fear  of  multiple  ulcers,  will  incur  misunderstandings  with  females,  will  be  afflicted  by 
boils,  itches  etc.  and  will  incur  financial  decline.  If  Mangal  happens  to  be  in  Agaman  Avastha, 
the  native  will  be  virtuous,  endowed  with  precious  gems,  will  adore  a  sharp  sword,  will  walk 
with  the  gait  of  an  elephant,  will  destroy  his  enemies  and  will  remove  the  miseries  of  his 
people.  If  Mangal  is  placed  in  Sabh  and  happens  to  be  in  exaltation,  the  native  will  be  skilful 
in  conducting  wars,  will  hold  the  flag  of  righteousness  aloft  and  will  be  wealthy;  if  Mangal 
happens  to  be  in  Sabh  in  Putr,  or  Dharm,  the  native  will  be  bereft  of  learning;  if  Mangal  is  in 
Sabh  in  Vyaya,  childlessness  and  no  wife  and  no  friends  will  result;  if  Mangal  is  in  other 
Bhavas  in  Sabh,  the  native  will  be  a  scholar  in  a  king's  court  (poet  laureate),  be  very  wealthy, 
honourable  and  charitable.  If  Mangal  is  in  Agam,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  virtues  and 
good  deeds,  will  be  distressed  by  diseases,  will  acquire  diseases  of  the  root  of  the  ears  ('Karan 
Mularogam'  &  'Padamulam  Urumulam'  etc.)  and  severe  gout  pains,  will  be  timid  and  will 
befriend  evil  lot.  If  Mangal  is  with  strength,  while  in  Bhojan  Avastha,  the  native  will  eat 
sweet-food;  if  devoid  of  strength,  will  indulge  in  base  acts  and  be  dishonourable.  If  Mangal  is 
in  Nritya  Lips,  the  native  will  earn  wealth  through  the  king  and  will  be  endowed  with  fullness 
of  gold,  diamonds  and  corals  in  his  house;  if  in  Kautuk,  will  be  curious  in  disposition  and  will 
be  endowed  with  friends  and  sons;  if  in  Kautuk  and  simultaneously  exalted,  will  be  honoured 
by  the  king  and  the  virtuous  and  will  be  virtuous  himself;  if  in  Nidr,  will  be  short-tempered, 
devoid  of  intelligence  and  wealth,  will  be  wicked,  fallen  from  virtuous  path  and  troubled  by 
diseases.  Should  Mangal  be  in  Upavesan  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  extremely  sinful  and  he 
will  incur  several  diseases,  will  be  indigent  and  not  peaceful.  If  Upavesan  occurs  for  Mangal 
in  Dharm,  the  native  will  lose  his  whole  wealth  apart  from  his  wife  and  progeny.  Mangal  in 
Netrapani  in  Lagn  will  give  poverty  and  will  destroy  the  native's  wife  and  progeny;  if  Mangal 
is  in  Netrapani  in  other  Bhavas,  this  confers  on  the  native  all  kinds  of  wealth  and  happiness 
from  wife  and  children.  The  Dhan,  or  Yuvati  position  of  Mangal  in  Netrapani  will  cause  fear 
from  lions  and  snakes  apart  from  giving  earnings  from  lands.  Furthermore  the  native's  wife 
will  predecease  him.  Should  Mangal  be  in  Prakash  in  Putr,  or  in  Yuvati,  the  native  will  lose 
his  wife  and  all  children.  If  Mangal  is  placed  in  Putr  in  Prakash  and  is  yuti  with  Sani,  the 
native  will  kill  cows.  Should  Mangal  be  in  Gaman  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  active  in  his 
assignments,  will  incur  diseases  of  the  joints,  burning  pains  in  the  eyes  and  will  obtain  dental 
afflictions  and  the  like,  he  will  have  fear  from  dogs  and  will  adore  the  guise  of  a  female.  In 
other  Bhavas  Mangal  in  Gaman  will  bring  royal  favours,  leadership  and  luxuries  of  life. 
Mangal  in  Agaman  will  cause  piles  and  diseases  of  the  rectum.  If  Mangal  is  in  Bhojan,  or  in 


Sayan  in  Putr,  or  in  Randhr,  there  will  be  untimely  death  for  the  native.  In  other  Bhavas 
Bhojan  of  Mangal  will  confer  wealth.  Should  Mangal  be  in  Nritya  Lips  and  happens  to  be  in 
Lagn,  Dhan,  Yuvati,  or  Kami,  the  native  will  receive  all  kinds  of  happiness;  there  will  be 
miseries  in  abundance,  if  Mangal  is  in  Nritya  Lips  and  placed  in  Randhr,  or  Dharm,  apart 
from  incurring  untimely  death.  In  other  Bhavas  Nritya  Lips  of  Mangal  will  make  the  native 
akin  to  Kuber.  Mangal  in  Yuvati,  or  in  Dharm  in  Kautuk  will  give  several  diseases  and  death 
of  the  first  child  and  wife.  In  other  Bhavas  Kautuk  will  confer  scholarship,  various  kinds  of 
wealth,  two  wives  and  more  female  children.  In  Nidr  Mangal  in  Lagn,  Dhan,  Sahaj,  Dharm, 
Karm,  or  Labh  will  give  scholarship,  foolishness  and  poverty.  Putr,  or  Yuvati  placement  of 
Mangal  in  Nidr  will  give  many  miseries  and  many  male  children.  Should  Rahu  join  Mangal  in 
Nidr  in  any  Bhava,  the  native  will  have  many  wives,  be  miserable  and  will  suffer  from  some 
diseases  on  the  surface  of  the  feet. 

76-86.  Effects  of  Budh's  Avasthas.  Should  Budh  in  Sayan  be  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  lame 
and  will  have  reddish  eyes  (like  the  black  bee);  if  Budh  is  in  Sayan  in  other  Bhavas,  the  native 
will  be  addicted  to  licentious  (disregarding  certain  rules)  pleasures  and  be  wicked.  If  Budh  is 
in  Upavesan  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  possess  (the  seven  principle)  virtues;  if  Budh  in 
Upavesan  is  in  Lagn,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  or  Drishtis  from  malefics,  or  is  yuti 
with  malefics,  penury  will  result;  if  Budh  in  Upavesan  is  in  Lagn,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  a 
benefic,  or  Drishtis  from  benefics,  or  is  yuti  with  benefics,  financial  happiness  will  follow.  If 
Budh  is  in  Netrapani,  the  native  will  be  devoid  of  learning,  wisdom,  well  wishers  and 
satisfaction,  but  he  will  be  honourable;  if  Budh  is  in  Putr  in  Netrapani,  the  subject  will  be 
bereft  of  happiness  from  wife  and  sons,  will  be  endowed  with  (more)  female  children  and  will 
gain  abundant  finance  through  royal  patronage.  If  Budh  is  in  Prakash,  the  native  will  be 
charitable,  merciful  and  meritorious,  he  will  cross  the  boundaries  of  ocean  in  respect  of  many 
branches  of  learning,  he  will  be  endowed  with  the  great  faculty  of  discrimination  and  will 
destroy  evil  people;  if  in  Gaman,  will  visit  the  courts  of  kings  on  many  occasions  and 
Goddess  Lakshmi  will  dwell  in  his  abode;  if  in  Agaman,  the  same  effects,  due  to  his  being  in 
Gaman,  will  fructify;  if  in  Sabh  and  happens  to  be  in  exaltation,  will  be  affluent  and 
meritorious  at  all  times,  will  be  equal  to  Kuber,  or  will  be  a  king,  or  a  minister,  will  be 
devoted  to  Lord  Vishnu  and  Lord  Shiva,  will  be  virtuous  and  will  attain  full  enlightenment. 
Should  Budh  be  in  Agam,  the  native  will  serve  base  men  and  will  gain  wealth  thereby,  will 
have  two  sons  and  one  fame  bringing  daughter.  If  Budh  is  in  Bhojan,  the  native  will  face 
financial  losses  through  litigations,  will  physically  lose  on  account  of  fear  from  the  king,  will 
be  fickle-minded  and  will  be  bereft  of  physical  and  conjugal  felicity;  if  in  Nritya  Lips,  will  be 
endowed  with  honour,  conveyances,  corals  (gems  etc.),  sons,  friends,  prowess  and  recognition 
in  assembly,  due  to  his  scholarship;  if  Budh  in  Nritya  Lips  Avastha  is  in  a  malefic' s  Rasi,  the 
native  will  be  addicted  to  prostitutes  and  will  long  for  licentious  pleasures.  If  Budh  is  in 
Kautuk  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  skilful  in  music;  if  Budh  is  in  Yuvati,  or  Randhr  with 
Kautuk,  the  native  will  be  addicted  to  courtezans;  if  Budh  in  Kautuk  is  placed  in  Dharm,  the 
native  will  be  meritorious  and  attain  heavens  after  death.  If  Budh  is  in  Nidr,  the  native  will  not 
enjoy  comfortable  sleep,  will  be  afflicted  by  neck,  or  neck  joint  'Samadhi'  diseases,  will  be 
devoid  of  co-born,  afflicted  by  miseries  galore,  will  enter  into  litigations  with  his  own  men 
and  will  lose  wealth  and  honour. 

87-98.  Effects  of  Guru's  Avasthas.  If  Guru  is  in  Sayan,  the  native  will  be  strong,  but  will 
speak  in  whispers,  he  will  be  very  tawny  in  complexion,  will  have  prominent  cheeks  and  will 
have  fear  from  enemies;  if  in  Upavesan,  will  be  garrulous  and  very  proud,  will  be  troubled  by 
the  king  and  enemies  and  will  have  ulcers  on  the  feet  shanks,  face  and  hands;  if  in  Netrapani, 
will  be  afflicted  by  diseases,  be  devoid  of  wealth,  fond  of  music  and  dances,  libidinous,  tawny 


in  complexion  and  will  be  attached  to  people  of  other  castes;  if  in  Prakash,  will  enjoy  virtues, 
will  be  happy,  splendourous  and  will  visit  holy  places,  devoted  to  Lord  Krishna;  if  Guru  in 
Prakash  is  exalted,  will  attain  greatness  among  men  and  will  be  equal  to  Kuber;  if  in  Gaman, 
will  be  adventurous,  happy  on  account  of  friends,  scholarly  and  endowed  with  Vedic  learning 
and  with  various  kinds  of  wealth;  if  in  Agaman,  serving  force,  excellent  women  and  the 
goddess  of  wealth  will  never  leave  the  native's  abode;  if  in  Sabh,  will  attain  comparability 
with  Guru  (God  of  speech)  in  the  matter  of  speech,  will  be  endowed  with  superior  corals, 
rubies  and  wealth,  will  be  rich  with  elephants,  horses  and  chariots  and  will  be  supremely 
learned;  if  in  Agam,  will  be  endowed  with  various  conveyances,  honours,  retinue  (many 
persons  will  take  good  care  of  him),  children,  wife,  friends  and  learning,  will  be  equal  to  a 
king,  extremely  noble,  fond  of  literature  and  will  take  to  the  path  of  the  virtuous;  if  in  Bhojan, 
will  always  beget  excellent  food  and  horses,  elephants  and  chariots,  while  Lakshmi,  the 
Goddess  of  Wealth,  will  never  leave  his  house;  if  in  Nritya  Lips,  will  receive  royal  honours, 
be  wealthy,  endowed  with  knowledge  of  moral  law  'Dharma'  and  Tantra,  will  be  supreme 
among  the  learned  and  be  a  great  grammarian;  if  in  Kautuk,  will  be  curious  in  disposition, 
very  rich,  will  shine,  like  Surya  in  his  circles,  be  exceedingly  kind,  happy,  honoured  by  the 
kings,  endowed  with  sons,  wealth  and  just  disposition,  will  be  very  strong  and  he  will  be  a 
scholar  in  the  king's  court;  if  in  Nidr,  will  be  foolish  in  all  his  undertakings,  will  suffer 
irredeemable  penury  and  will  be  devoid  of  righteous  acts. 

99-1 10.  Effects  of  Sukr's  Avasthas.  If  Sukr  is  in  Sayan,  the  native,  although  strong,  will  incur 
dental  disease,  he  will  be  very  short-tempered,  bereft  of  wealth,  will  seek  union  with 
courtezans  and  be  licentious;  if  in  Upavesan,  will  be  endowed  with  a  multitude  of  nine  gems 
('Navamin  Vraja')  and  golden  ornaments,  be  ever  happy,  will  destroy  enemies  and  will  be 
honoured  by  the  king,  will  have  highly  increased  honours;  if  in  Netrapani  in  Lagn,  Yuvati,  or 
Karm,  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth  on  account  of  afflictions  of  the  sense  of  sight  (heavy 
medical  expenses,  due  to  severe  eye  diseases);  if  Netrapani  occurs,  when  Sukr  is  in  other 
Bhavas,  the  native  will  own  large  houses.  Should  Sukr  be  in  Prakash  in  its  own  Rasi,  in  its 
exaltation  Rasi,  or  in  a  friendly  Rasi,  the  native  will  sport,  like  a  lofty  elephant,  will  be  equal 
to  a  king  and  be  skilful  in  poetry  and  music.  If  Sukr  is  in  Gaman,  the  native  will  not  have  a 
long-living  mother,  will  lament  over  separation  from  his  own  people  and  will  have  fear  from 
enemies;  if  in  Agaman,  will  command  abundant  wealth,  will  undertake  to  visit  superior 
shrines,  will  be  ever  enthusiastic  and  will  contract  diseases  of  the  hand  and  foot;  if  in  Sabh, 
will  earn  eminence  in  the  king's  court,  will  be  very  virtuous,  will  destroy  enemies,  be  equal  to 
Kuber  in  wealth,  will  be  charitable,  will  ride  on  horses  and  will  be  excellent  among  men;  if  in 
Agam,  there  will  be  no  advent  of  wealth,  but  there  will  be  troubles  from  enemies,  separation 
from  children  and  relatives,  diseases  and  lack  of  pleasures  from  the  wife.  Should  Sukr  be  in 
Bhojan,  the  native  will  be  distressed,  due  to  hunger,  diseases  and  many  kinds  of  fear  from 
enemies;  if  Sukr  is  in  Kanya  in  Bhojan,  the  native  will  be  very  rich  and  will  be  honoured  by 
scholars.  If  Sukr  is  in  Nritya  Lips,  the  native  will  be  skilful  in  literature  and  intelligent,  will 
play  musical  instruments,  like  lute,  tabla  etc.,  be  meritorious  and  very  affluent;  if  in  Kautuk, 
will  be  equal  to  Lord  Indra,  will  attain  greatness  in  the  assembly,  be  learned  and  will  have 
Lakshmi  always  dwelling  in  his  abode;  if  in  Nidr,  will  be  interested  in  serving  others,  will 
blame  others,  be  heroic,  garrulous  and  will  be  wandering  all  over  the  earth. 

1 1 1-122.  Effects  of  Sani's  Avasthas.  If  Sani  is  in  Sayan,  the  native  will  be  troubled  by  hunger 
and  thirst,  will  incur  diseases  in  boyhood  and  later  on  he  will  become  wealthy;  if  in  Upavesan, 
will  be  troubled  greatly  by  enemies,  will  contract  dangers,  will  have  ulcers  all  over  the  body, 
will  be  self-respected  and  will  be  punished  by  the  king;  if  in  Netrapani,  will  be  endowed  with 
a  charming  female,  wealth,  royal  favour  and  friends,  will  have  knowledge  of  many  arts  and 


will  be  an  eloquent  speaker;  if  in  Prakash,  will  be  very  virtuous,  very  wealthy,  intelligent, 
sportive,  splendourous,  merciful  and  devoted  to  Lord  Shiva;  if  in  Gaman,  will  be  very  rich 
and  endowed  with  sons,  will  grab  enemy's  lands  and  will  be  a  scholar  at  royal  court;  if  in 
Agaman,  will  be  akin  to  a  donkey  (foolish)  and  bereft  of  happiness  from  wife  and  children, 
will  always  roam  pitiably  without  anybody's  patronage;  if  in  Sabh,  the  native  will  have 
surprising  possessions  of  abundant  precious  stones  and  gold,  will  be  endowed  with  great 
judicial  (political)  knowledge  and  will  be  extremely  brilliant;  if  in  Agam,  will  incur  diseases 
and  will  not  be  skilful  in  earning  royal  patronage;  if  in  Bhojan,  will  enjoy  tastes  of  food,  will 
be  weak-sighted  and  will  be  fickle-minded,  due  to  mental  delusion;  if  in  Nritya  Lips,  will  be 
righteous,  extremely  opulent,  honoured  by  the  king  and  brave,  heroic  in  the  field  of  war;  if  in 
Kautuk,  will  be  endowed  with  lands  and  wealth,  will  be  happy,  endowed  with  pleasures 
through  charming  females  and  learned  in  poetry,  arts  etc.;  if  in  Nidr,  will  be  rich,  endowed 
with  charming  virtues  and  valorous,  will  destroy  even  fierce  enemies  and  will  be  skilful  in 
seeking  pleasures  through  harlots. 

123-134.  Effects  of  Rahu's  Avasthas.  If  Rahu  is  in  Sayan,  the  native  will  experience  miseries 
in  abundance,  but,  if  Rahu  in  Sayan  is  placed  in  Vrishabh,  Mithun,  Kanya,  or  Mesh,  the  native 
will  be  endowed  with  wealth  and  grains.  If  Rahu  is  in  Upavesan,  the  native  will  be  distressed, 
due  to  ulcers,  will  be  endowed  with  royal  association,  be  highly  honourable  and  ever  devoid 
of  financial  happiness;  if  in  Netrapani,  will  be  troubled  by  eye  diseases,  will  have  fear  from 
wicked  people,  snakes  and  thieves  and  will  incur  financial  decline;  if  in  Prakash,  will  acquire 
a  high  position,  will  perform  auspicious  acts  and  will  obtain  elevation  of  his  financial  state, 
will  be  highly  virtuous,  a  chief  in  the  king's  court,  charming,  like  freshly  formed  clouds  (that 
will  cause  soon  rain)  and  will  be  very  prosperous  in  foreign  places;  if  in  Gaman,  will  be 
endowed  with  numerous  children,  be  scholarly,  wealthy,  charitable  and  honoured  by  the  king; 
if  in  Agaman,  will  be  very  irritable,  bereft  of  intelligence  and  wealth,  crooked,  miserly  and 
libidinous;  if  in  Sabh,  will  be  scholarly,  miserly  and  endowed  with  many  virtues,  wealth  and 
happiness;  if  in  Agam,  will  be  always  mentally  distressed,  will  have  fear  from  enemies  and 
litigations  with  enemies,  be  bereft  of  his  own  men,  will  face  financial  destruction  and  will  be 
crafty  and  emaciated;  if  in  Bhojan,  will  be  distressed  without  food  and  dull-witted,  will  not  be 
bold  in  his  acts  and  will  be  bereft  of  conjugal  and  progenic  happiness;  if  in  Nritya  Lips,  will 
contract  a  serious  disease,  which  seems  difficult  to  subdue,  will  have  afflicted  eyes  and  will 
have  fear  from  enemies,  will  decline  financially  and  righteously;  if  in  Kautuk,  will  be  devoid 
of  a  position  (place),  be  interested  in  others'  females  and  will  steal  others'  wealth;  if  in  Nidr, 
will  be  a  repository  of  virtues,  will  be  endowed  with  wife  and  children,  be  bold,  proud  and 
very  affluent. 

135-146.  Effects  of  Ketu's  Avasthas.  If  Ketu  is  in  Sayan  in  Mesh,  Vrishabh,  Mithun,  or 
Kanya,  there  will  be  plenty  of  wealth;  if  Ketu  is  in  Sayan  in  other  Rasis,  increased  diseases 
will  follow.  If  Ketu  is  in  Upavesan,  the  native  will  suffer  from  ulcers  and  will  have  fear  from 
enemies,  windy  diseases,  snakes  and  thieves.  Should  Ketu  be  in  Netrapani,  the  native  will 
contract  eye  diseases  and  will  have  fear  from  wicked  people,  snakes,  enemies  and  people  of 
royal  family.  If  Ketu  is  in  Prakash,  the  native  will  be  wealthy  and  righteous,  will  live  in 
foreign  places,  be  enthusiastic  and  genuine  and  will  serve  the  king;  if  in  Gaman,  will  be 
endowed  with  many  sons  and  abundant  wealth,  be  scholarly,  virtuous,  charitable  and  excellent 
among  men;  if  in  Agaman,  will  incur  many  diseases,  will  face  loss  of  wealth,  will  hurt 
(others)  with  his  teeth  ('Danta  Ghatin'),  be  a  tale  bearer  and  will  blame  others;  if  in  Sabh,  will 
be  garrulous,  very  proud,  miserly,  licentious  and  skilful  in  evil  branches  of  learning;  if  in 
Agam,  will  be  a  notorious  sinner,  will  enter  into  litigations  with  his  relatives,  will  be  wicked 
and  troubled  by  diseases  and  enemies;  if  in  Bhojan,  will  always  be  distressed  with  hunger, 


penury  and  diseases  and  will  roam  all  over  the  earth;  if  in  Nritya  Lips,  will  be  distressed,  due 
to  diseases,  will  have  a  floral  mark  on  the  eye  (white  of  the  pupil),  will  be  impertinent  and 
wicked  and  will  plan  evils;  if  in  Kautuk,  will  seek  union  with  dancing  females  (prostitutes), 
will  suffer  positional  displacement,  will  take  to  evil  paths  and  will  roam  all  over;  if  in  Nidr, 
will  be  endowed  with  wealth  and  corns,  will  be  virtuous  and  will  spend  his  time  sportively. 

147.  General  Effects  (up  to  Sloka  155).  O  Brahmin,  if  a  benefic  Grah  is  in  Sayan,  there  will 
be  benefic  effects  at  all  times,  according  to  the  learned. 

148.  If  a  malefic  is  in  Bhojan,  everything  will  be  destroyed  and  there  is  no  need  of  a  second 
thought. 

149.  Should  a  malefic  in  Yuvati  be  in  Nidr,  auspicious  effects  will  follow,  provided,  that  there 
is  no  Drishti  from  another  malefic. 

150.  Declare  without  a  second  thought  auspicious  effects,  following  the  location  of  a  malefic 
in  Putr  Bhava,  but  only  with  Nidr,  or  in  Sayan. 

151.  Untimely  death,  due  to  royal  wrath,  will  come  to  pass,  if  there  is  a  malefic  in  Randhr 
Bhava  in  Nidr,  or  in  Sayan. 

152.  If  in  the  case  of  a  malefic  in  Randhr  Bhava  in  Nidr,  or  Sayan  there  happens  to  be  a 
benefic  Drishti,  or  the  Yuti  of  a  benefic,  (untimely)  death  will  be  in  the  river  Ganges,  i.e. 
Gangetic  belt,  shrines  etc. 

153.  If  there  is  a  malefic  in  Karm  in  Sayan,  or  Bhojan,  the  native  will  face  many  miseries  on 
account  of  his  own  deeds. 

154.  O  excellent  of  the  Brahmins,  doubtlessly  a  Raj  Yog  will  come  to  pass,  if  Candr  is  in 
Karm  in  Kautuk,  or  Prakash. 

155.  Thus  the  good  and  bad  effects  should  be  guessed,  assessing  the  strength  and  weakness  of 
the  Grahas,  concerning  all  the  Bhavas. 

Ch.  46.  Dashas  of  Grahas 

1.  Maitreya  said.  O  Venerable  Maharishi  Parashar!  You  are  omniscient.  There  is  no  subject, 
with  which  you  are  not  conversant.  Therefore  now  please  favour  me  with  guidance  about  the 
different  kinds  of  Dashas  (periods)  of  the  various  Grahas. 

2-5.  Maharishi  Parashar  replied.  O  Brahmin!  Dashas  are  of  many  kinds.  Amongst  them 
Vimshottari  is  the  most  appropriate  for  the  general  populace.  But  the  other  Dashas,  followed 
in  special  cases,  are  Astottari,  Shodshottari,  Dwadashottari,  Panchottari,  Shatabdik, 
Chaturashiti-sama,  Dwisaptati-sama,  Shastihayani,  Shat-trimshat-sama.  Our  ancients  have 
described  these  different  kinds  of  Dashas,  based  on  Nakshatras. 

6-11.  O  Brahmin!  Some  Maharishis  have  made  a  mention  of  Kala  and  Chakr  Dasha,  but  they 
have  recognized  the  Kala  Chakr  Dasha,  as  supreme.  The  other  kinds  of  Dashas,  propagated  by 
the  sages,  are  Char,  Sthir,  Kendr,  Karak,  Brahma  Grah,  Manduk,  Shul,  Yogardh,  Drig, 


Trikon,  Rasi,  Panchswara,  Yogini,  Pind,  Nausargik,  Asht  Varg,  Sandhya,  Pachak,  Tara  etc. 
But  in  our  view  all  these  Dashas  are  not  appropriate. 

Vimshottari 

12-14.  Beginning  from  Kritika,  the  Lords  of  Dashas  are  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Rahu,  Guru, 
Sani,  Budh,  Ketu  and  Sukr  in  that  order.  Thus,  if  the  Nakshatras  from  Kritika  to  the  Janm 
Nakshatr  are  divided  by  nine,  the  remainder  will  signify  the  Lord  of  the  commencing  Dasha. 
The  remaining  Dashas  will  be  of  the  Grahas  in  the  order,  given  above.  In  Kali  Yuga  the 
natural  life-span  of  a  human  being  is  generally  taken,  as  120  years.  Therefore  Vimshottari 
Dasha  is  considered  to  be  the  most  appropriate  and  the  best  of  all  Dashas. 

15.  The  periods  of  Dashas  of  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Rahu,  Guru,  Sani,  Budh,  Ketu  and  Sukr 
are  6,  10,  7,  18,  16,  19,  17,  7  and  20  in  that  order. 

16.  To  find  out  the  remainder  of  the  Dasha,  operating  at  the  time  of  birth,  first  find  out  the 
expired  portion  of  the  Dasha  of  the  concerned  Grah.  This  is  done,  as  follows.  Multiply  the 
Dasha  period  of  the  Grah  concerned  by  the  period  of  the  stay  of  Candr  in  Janm  Nakshatr,  that 
has  expired  and  divide  that  amount  by  the  total  period  of  the  stay  of  Candr  in  that  Nakshatr. 
The  figure  in  years,  months  etc.  so  arrived  at  will  be  the  expired  period  of  the  Dasha.  If  this 
figure  is  deducted  from  the  total  period  of  the  Dasha,  we  will  get  the  balance  of  Dasha  at  the 
time  of  birth. 

Ashtottari 

17-20.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  O  Brahmin,  the  sages  have  recommended  the  adoption  of 
Ashtottari,  when  Rahu  not  being  in  Lagn,  in  any  other  Kendr,  or  Trikon  to  the  Lord  of  the 
Lagn.  From  4  Nakshatras  from  Ardra  commences  the  Dasha  of  Surya,  from  3  after  that  begins 
the  Dasha  of  Candr,  4  after  that  will  bring  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  3  after  that  the  Lord  of  Dasha 
will  be  Budh,  4  therefrom  will  have  Sani,  as  the  Dasha  Lord,  3  thereafter  the  Lord  will  be 
Guru,  Rahu  will  be  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  4  Nakshatras  after  that  and  then  Sukr  will  take  over 
the  lordship  of  the  Dasha  3  Nakshatras  from  the  last  one  mentioned  above.  The  Lord  of  the 
Dasha  at  birth  will  be  determined  by  counting  in  this  order  up  to  the  Janm  Nakshatr.  The 
duration  of  Ashtottari  Dasha  for  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Sani,  Guru,  Rahu  and  Sukr  are 
6,  15,  8,  17,  10,  19,  12  and  21  in  that  order.  Thus  in  this  Dasha  system  only  8  Grahas  play  the 
role  of  Dasha  Lords,  Ketu  having  been  denied  this  privilege. 

21-22.  The  Dashas  of  the  various  Grahas  have  been  specified  above.  In  the  case  of  malefic 
Grahas  the  Dasha  span  of  one  Nakshatr  is  Vi  of  the  Dasha  of  the  Grah.  It  is  l/3rd  in  the  case  of 
benefics.  Thus  the  expired  portion  of  the  Dasha  is  calculated,  according  to  the  method, 
followed  for  Vimshottari  Dasha,  by  multiplying  the  Bhayat,  i.e.  the  expired  period  of  the  stay 
of  Candr  in  the  Janm  Nakshatr,  by  the  Dasha  portion  of  the  Janm  Nakshatr  and  dividing  it  by 
Bhabhog,  i.e.  the  total  period  of  the  stay  of  Candr  in  the  Janm  Nakshatr.  Then  the  balance  of 
Dasha  at  birth  can  also  be  ascertained.  If  Uttarashadha  happens  to  be  the  Janm  Nakshatr,  the 
duration  of  its  first  three  Padas  is  taken,  as  Bhabhog  and  the  Dasha  calculations  should  be 
done  accordingly.  The  Dasha  and  calculations  for  Abhijit  Nakshatr  are  done  by  taking  the  4th 
Pad  of  Uttarashadha  plus  the  15th  part  of  the  beginning  of  Shravan.  For  Shravan  the  Bhabhog 
would  be  the  total  of  its  duration  in  Ghatikas  minus  the  1/1 5th  part  of  the  beginning  of 
Shravan. 


Shodshottari 

23.  It  will  be  advisable  to  adopt  the  Shodshottari,  if  the  birth  is  in  the  day  in  Krishna  Paksh 
(dark  half  of  the  month),  or  at  night  in  Shukla  Paksh  (bright  half). 

24-26.  The  Dasha  may  be  adopted,  when  the  Lagn  is  in  the  Hora  of  Candr  with  birth  in  the 
Krishna  Paksh,  or,  when  Lagn  is  in  the  Hora  of  Surya  with  birth  in  the  Shukla  Paksh.  Count 
the  number  of  Nakshatras  from  Pushya  to  the  Janm  Nakshatr.  Divide  this  number  by  8.  The 
remainder  will  indicate  the  Dashas  of  Surya,  Mangal,  Guru,  Sani,  Ketu,  Candr,  Budh  and 
Sukr.  The  Dashas  of  the  above  Grahas  are  of  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17  and  18  years. 

Dwadashottari 

27-28.  This  Dasha  system  will  be  appropriate  for  one,  whose  Lagn  is  in  the  Navahs  of  Sukr. 
Count  from  Janm  Nakshatr  to  Revati.  Divide  this  number  by  8.  The  remainder  will  indicate 
the  Dasha  of  the  Grah  concerned.  The  Dasha  order  is  Surya,  Guru,  Ketu,  Budh,  Rahu, 
Mangal,  Sani,  Candr.  The  Dashas  will  be  of  7,  9,  11,  13,  15,  17,  19  and  21  years  of  the 
Grahas. 

Panchottari 

(29-30)  This  Dasha  is  considered  suitable  for  those,  whose  Lagn  is  Kark  and  also  in  the  Kark 
Dvadashahs.  Count  from  Anuradha  up  to  the  Janm  Nakshatr  and  divide  the  number  by  7.  The 
remainder  will  indicate  the  Dasha.  The  order  of  the  Dasha  Lords  is  Surya,  Budh,  Sani, 
Mangal,  Sukr,  Candr  and  Guru.  The  Dashas  of  the  Grahas  are  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17  and  18 
years. 

Shatabdik 

(31-32)  This  Dasha  system  has  been  considered  appropriate,  if  Lagn  is  Vargottama.  This 
happens,  when  Lagn  in  the  Rasi  Kundali  and  the  Navahs  Lagn  are  in  the  same  Rasi. 

(33-34)  Count  from  Revati  to  the  Janm  Nakshatr  and  divide  this  number  by  seven.  The 
remainder  will  indicate  the  Lords  of  Dashas  in  this  order:  Surya,  Candr,  Sukr,  Budh,  Guru, 
Mangal  and  Sani.  Their  Dashas  will  be  of  5,  5,  10,  10,  20,  20  and  30  years. 

Chaturashiti-sama 

35-36.  Chaturashiti-sama  Dasha  is  considered  appropriate  in  cases,  where  the  Karm's  Lord  is 
placed  in  Karm.  Count  from  Swati  to  the  Janm  Nakshatr  and  divide  this  number  by  7.  The 
remainder  will  indicate  the  Dasha  Lords  in  the  following  order:  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh, 
Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani.  The  Dasha  period  of  each  Grah  is  12  years. 

Dwisaptati-sama 

37-39.  This  Dasha  system  is  considered  suitable  in  cases,  where  the  Lord  of  Lagn  is  in  Lagn, 
or  in  Yuvati.  Count  from  Mul  to  the  Janm  Nakshatr  and  divide  the  number  by  8.  The 
remainder  will  determine  the  Dasha  Lords  in  the  following  order:  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal, 


Budh,  Guru,  Sukr,  Sani  and  Rahu.  In  this  Dasha  system  all  the  eight  Grahas  have  Dashas  of  9 
years  each. 

Shastihayani 

40-41.  This  Dasha  may  be  adopted  in  cases,  where  Surya  is  posited  in  Lagn.  The  order  of 
Dasha  Lords  in  this  system  is,  as  follows:  Guru,  Surya,  Mangal,  Candr,  Budh,  Sukr,  Sani  and 
Rahu.  The  following  shows  the  Nakshatras,  falling  under  the  various  Dasha  Lords.  The 
Dashas  of  Guru,  Surya  and  Mangal  are  of  10  years.  The  remaining  Grahas  have  Dashas  of  6 
years  each.  Guru  (Ashvini,  Bharani,  Kritika,  Punarvasu),  Surya  (Rohini,  Mrigashira,  Ardra, 
UAshadha),  Mangal  (Pushya,  Aslesha,  Magha,  Revati),  Candr  (P.Phalguni,  U.Phalguni, 
Hast),  Budh  (Swati,  Vishakah,  Anuradha),  Sukr  (Jyeshtha,  Mul,  P.  Ashadha),  Sani  (Abhijit, 
Shravan,  Dhanishtha),  Rahu  (Shatabhisha,  P.Bhadra,  U.Bhadra). 

Shat-trimshat-sama 

42-43.  Count  from  Shravan  to  the  Janm  Nakshatr  and  divide  the  number  by  8.  The  remainder 
1  etc.  will  indicate  the  Dasha  Lords,  whose  order  will  be,  as  follows:  Candr,  Surya,  Guru, 
Mangal,  Budh,  Sani,  Sukr  and  Rahu.  Their  Dashas  will  be  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7  and  8  years.  If  the 
birth  is  during  the  day  and  Lagn  is  in  the  Hora  of  Surya  and,  if  the  birth  is  at  night  and  Lagn  is 
in  the  Hora  of  Candr,  adoption  of  this  system  would  be  preferable. 

Kaal 

44-49.  5  Ghatikas  before  the  sight  of  the  semi-disk  of  the  setting  Surya  and  5  Ghatikas  after 
that  and  5  Ghatikas  before  and  after  the  rising  of  Surya,  that  is  10  Ghatikas  in  the  evening  and 
10  Ghatikas  in  the  morning,  respectively.  The  total  period  of  both  these  Sandhyas  (twilight)  is 
said  to  be  20  Ghatikas.  The  20  Ghatikas  of  the  night  have  been  given  the  name  Purna  and  the 
20  Ghatikas  of  the  day  have  been  given  the  name  Mugdha.  The  Sandhya  at  the  time  of  sunrise 
is  called  Khanda  and  the  Sandhya  at  the  time  of  sunset  is  said  to  be  Sudh.  Both  of  these 
Sandhyas  are  of  10  Ghatikas  each.  If  the  birth  is  in  Purna,  or  Mugdha,  its  past  Ghatikas  should 
be  multiplied  by  2  and  the  product  should  be  divided  by  15.  The  figure  so  arrived  at  should  be 
converted  into  years,  months  etc.  By  multiplying  it  by  the  serial  number  of  Surya  and  other 
Grahas  in  their  normal  order,  we  will  get  the  Kaal  Dasha  of  these  Grahas.  If  the  birth  is  during 
Sandhya,  then  its  past  Ghatikas  should  be  multiplied  by  4  and  the  product  divided  by  15.  The 
figure  so  arrived  at  in  terms  of  years,  months  etc.  should  be  multiplied  by  the  serial  number  of 
Surya  and  the  other  Grahas  to  get  the  Kaal  Dasha  of  all  the  nine  Grahas. 

Chakr 

50-5 1 .  If  the  birth  is  at  night,  the  Dasha  will  commence  from  Lagn  Rasi.  If  the  birth  is  during 
the  day,  the  Dasha  will  start  from  the  Rasi,  in  which  the  Lord  of  Lagn  is  placed.  If  the  birth  is 
during  Sandhya,  the  Dasha  will  begin  from  the  Rasi  of  the  second  Bhava.  The  Dasha  of  each 
Rasi  is  10  years.  As  it  is  the  Dasha  system  of  the  12  Rasis  in  the  Zodiac,  it  has  been  named,  as 
Chakr  Dasha. 

Kaal  Chakr 


52-53.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  O  Brahmin!  Now,  after  making  obedience  to  Lord  Shiva,  I 
shall  describe  the  Kala  Chakr  Dasha.  Whatever  was  related  by  Lord  Shiva  to  Goddess  Parvati, 
is  being  explained  by  me  for  the  use  of  sages  to  be  utilized  for  the  welfare  of  the  people. 

54-55.  By  drawing  vertical  and  horizontal  lines,  prepare  2  Kundalis,  Savya  and  Apsavya,  of 
12  apartments  (Kosthas)  each.  From  the  second  Kostha  in  each  Kundali  fix  the  Rasis  Mesh, 
Vrishabh,  Mithun,  Kark,  Simh,  Kanya,  Tula,  Vrischik,  Dhanu,  Makar,  Kumbh,  Meen.  Then 
Nakshatras  may  be  incorporated  in  the  manner,  indicated  hereafter.  These  Kundalis, 
indicative  of  the  12  Rasis,  are  called  Kala  Chakr. 

56-58.  Write  Ashvini,  Bharani  and  Kritika  in  the  Savya  Chakr  and  Rohini,  Mrigashira,  Ardra 
in  the  Apsavya.  Then  incorporate  the  three  following  Nakshatras,  Punarvasu,  Pushya  and 
Aslesha  in  the  Savya  and  Magha,  Purvaphalguni  and  Uttaraphalguni  in  the  Apsavya.  Then 
incorporate  the  three  following,  Hast,  Chitra  and  Swati  in  the  Savya  and  Vishakah,  Anuradha 
and  Jyeshtha  in  the  Apsavya.  Then  incorporate  Mul,  Purvashadha  and  Uttarashadha  in  the 
Savya  and  Shravan,  Dhanishtha  and  Shatabhisha  in  the  Apsavya.  Finally  incorporate  the  last 
three  Nakshatras,  Purvabhadrapad,  Uttarabhadrapad  and  Revati  in  the  Savya  Chakr.  Now 
there  will  be  15  Nakshatras  in  the  Savya  and  12  Nakshatras  in  the  Apsavya,  (because  for  the 
12  Rasis  there  are  12  Padas  of  3  Nakshatras,  the  Navahsas).  The  Padas  of  Ashvini,  Punarvasu, 
Hast,  Mul,  Purvabhadrapad,  Kritika,  Aslesha,  Swati,  Uttarashadha  and  Revati  of  the  Savya 
should  be  reckoned  in  the  same  manner,  as  the  Padas  of  Ashvini. 

59.  Now  I  shall  describe  in  detail,  how  the  Deha  and  Jiva  should  be  reckoned  in  the  Padas 
(quarters)  of  the  Nakshatras. 

60.  In  the  first  Pad  of  Ashvini  Mesh  is  indicative  of  Deha  (body)  and  Dhanu  is  indicative  of 
Jiva  (life).  And  the  Lords  of  Mesh,  Vrishabh,  Mithun,  Kark,  Simh,  Kanya,  Tula,  Vrischik  and 
Dhanu  are  Lords  of  the  Dashas  in  the  order,  as  described  before. 

61.  In  the  second  Pad  of  Ashvini  Makar  is  Deha  and  Mithun  is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  nine 
Rasis  from  Makar  to  Mithun  are  Lords  of  the  Dashas. 

62.  In  the  third  Pad  of  the  ten  Nakshatras,  beginning  from  Ashvini,  Vrishabh  is  Deha  and 
Mithun  is  Jiva.  The  Lords  of  the  Rasis  Vrishabh,  Mesh,  Meen,  Kumbh,  Makar,  Dhanu,  Mesh, 
Vrishabh  and  Mithun  are  Lords  of  the  Dashas  in  that  order. 

63-64.  For  the  4*  Pad  of  the  10  Nakshatras,  beginning  from  Ashvini,  Kark  is  Deha  and  Meen 
is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  nine  Rasis  from  Kark  to  Meen  are  the  Lords  of  Dashas. 

65.  In  the  four  Padas  of  the  5  Nakshatras,  Bharani,  Pushya,  Chitra,  Purvashadha  and 
Uttarabhadrapad,  Deha  and  Jiva  are  the  same,  as  for  Bharani. 

66.  In  the  first  Pad  of  Bharani  Vrischik  is  Deha  and  Meen  is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis 
Vrischik,  Tula,  Kanya,  Kark,  Simh,  Mithun,  Vrishabh,  Mesh  and  Meen  are  the  Lords  of 
Dashas  in  this  order. 

67.  In  the  2nd  Pad  of  Bharani  Kumbh  is  Deha  and  Kanya  is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  Kumbh, 
Makar,  Dhanu,  Mesh,  Vrishabh,  Mithun,  Kark,  Simh  and  Kanya  are  the  Lords  of  Dashas  in 
that  order. 


68.  In  the  3rd  Pad  of  Bharani  Tula  is  Deha  and  Kanya  is  Jiva  and  Lords  of  the  Rasis  Tula, 
Vrischik,  Dhanu,  Makar,  Kumbh,  Meen,  Vrischik,  Tula  and  Kanya  are  the  Dasha  Lords  in 
this  order. 

69.  In  the  4th  Pad  of  Bharani  Kark  is  Deha  and  Kumbh  is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis  Kark, 
Simh,  Mithun,  Vrishabh,  Mesh,  Meen,  Kumbh,  Makar  and  Dhanu  are  the  Dasha  Lords  in  this 
order. 

71-72.  O  Brahmin!  I  have  thus  given  you  the  description  of  Savya  Chakr.  Now  I  shall  give  the 
description  of  Apsavya  Chakr.  Prepare  a  similar  chart  of  12  apartments  and  from  the  2nd 
apartment  onwards  place  the  Rasis  from  Vrischik  onwards  in  the  reverse  order.  In  this  chart 
Deha  and  Jiva  would  be  the  same  for  Rohini,  Magha,  Vishakah  and  Shravan,  as  for  Rohini. 

73-76.  In  the  first  Pad  of  Rohini  Kark  is  Deha  and  Dhanu  is  Jiva.  The  Lords  of  the  Rasis 
Dhanu,  Makar,  Kumbh,  Meen,  Mesh,  Vrishabh,  Mithun,  Simh  and  Tula  will  be  the  Dasha 
Lords  in  this  order.  In  the  2nd  Tula  will  be  Deha  and  Kanya  the  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis 
Kanya,  Tula,  Vrischik,  Meen,  Kumbh,  Makar,  Dhanu,  Vrischik  and  Vrischik  will  be  the 
Dasha  Lords.  In  the  3rd  Kumbh  will  be  Deha  and  Kanya  Jiva.  The  Lords  of  the  Rasis  Kanya, 


Simh,  Kark,  Mithun,  Vrishabh,  Mesh,  Dhanu,  Makar  and  Kumbh  will  be  the  Dasha  Lords.  In 
the  4th  Vrischik  will  be  Deha  and  Meen  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis  Meen,  Mesh, 
Vrishabh,  Mithun,  Simh,  Kark,  Kanya,  Tula  and  Vrischik  will  be  the  Lords. 


77.  In  the  4  Padas  of  the  Apsavya  Nakshatras  Mrigashira,  Ardra,  Purvaphalguni, 
Uttaraphalguni,  Anuradha,  Jyeshtha,  Dhanishtha  and  Shatabhisha  the  Deha  and  Jiva  and  the 
Dasha  Lords  will  be  the  same,  as  for  Mrigashira. 

78-81.  In  the  first  Pad  of  Mrigashira  Kark  is  Deha  and  Meen  is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis 
Meen,  Kumbh,  Makar,  Dhanu,  Vrischik,  Tula,  Kanya,  Simh  and  Kark  will  be  the  Dasha  Lords 
in  this  order.  In  the  2nd  Vrishabh  is  Deha  and  Mithun  is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis 
Mithun,  Vrishabh,  Mesh,  Dhanu,  Makar,  Kumbh,  Meen,  Mesh  and  Vrishabh  will  be  the 
Dasha  Lords.  In  the  3rd  Makar  is  Deha  and  Mithun  is  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis  Mithun, 
Simh,  Kark,  Kanya,  Tula,  Vrischik,  Meen,  Kumbh  and  Makar  will  be  the  Dasha  Lords.  In  the 
4th  Mesh  will  be  Deha  and  Dhanu  Jiva  and  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis  Dhanu,  Vrischik,  Tula, 
Kanya,  Simh,  Kark,  Mithun,  Vrishabh  and  Mesh  will  be  the  Dasha  Lords. 


82.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  O  Brahmin!  The  description  of  the  Deha  and  Jiva  of  the  Padas  of 
the  Apsavya  Nakshatras  and  the  Dasha  Lords  is  the  same,  as  narrated  by  Lord  Mahadeva  to 
Goddess  Parvati. 

83.  Maitreya  said.  O  Venerable  Maharishi  Parashar!  Now  please  guide  me  about  the  Dasha 
spans  of  the  Dasha  Lords,  described  by  you.  Please  also  demonstrate,  how  the  commencement 
of  the  Dasha,  its  expired  and  the  remaining  periods  at  the  birth  are  to  be  calculated. 

84.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  5,  21,  7,  9,  10,  16  and  4  years  are  the  Dasha  spans  of  Surya, 
Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani. 

85-86.  The  span  of  life  of  a  person  is  determined  from  the  Padas  (Ahsas)  of  the  Nakshatr  at 
the  time  of  birth,  or  the  time  of  query  and  the  years  allotted  to  the  9  Rasis,  commencing  from 
it  (the  Pad  of  the  Nakshatr).  Some  sages  are  of  the  view,  that  the  person  will  enjoy  full  span  of 
life  (Purna  Ayu),  if  his  birth  is  at  the  commencement  of  the  Padas,  will  have  middle  span  of 


life  (Madhaya  Ayu),  if  the  birth  is  in  the  middle  of  the  Padas  and  short  span  of  life  ('Alap 
Ayu'),  or  will  face  death-like  sufferings,  if  the  birth  is  at  the  end  of  the  Padas  of  the  Nakshatr. 

87-88.  According  to  this  principle,  we  should  be  acquainted  with  the  Padas  of  the  Nakshatras. 
Now  I  shall  tell  you,  how  the  calculations  are  made,  according  to  the  proportion  of  the  Padas 
of  a  Nakshatr.  The  number  of  Ashvini  etc.,  whichever  may  be  the  past  Nakshatras,  should  be 
divided  by  3.  Thereafter  the  remainder  should  be  multiplied  by  4.  To  the  figure  so  made 
available  the  Pad  of  the  present  Nakshatr  should  be  added.  The  product  will  be  the  Navahs 
from  Mesh  onwards. 

89.  The  number  of  years  (Purna  Ayu)  are,  as  under.  For  the  Ahs  in  Mesh  100  years,  in 
Vrishabh  85  years,  in  Mithun  83  years,  in  Kark  86  years.  The  number  of  years  will  be  the 
same  for  Rasis,  situated  the  5th  and  9th  to  them. 

90-91.  Multiply  the  past  Ghatikas,  Palas  etc.  of  the  Pad  of  the  Nakshatr,  in  which  a  person  is 
born,  by  the  existing  Dasha  years  and  divide  it  by  15.  The  result  will  indicate  the  expired 
period  of  the  Dasha  in  years,  months  etc.  By  deducting  it  from  the  total  number  of  years 
allotted,  we  get  the  balance  of  Dasha  at  birth.  The  Dasha  should  be  taken,  as  commencing 
from  that  Rasi. 

92.  Multiply  the  past  Ghatikas,  Palas  etc.  of  the  present  Pad  of  the  Nakshatr  by  the  number  of 
years  and  divide  the  product  by  the  fourth  part  of  Bhabhog.  The  years  etc.  so  obtained  may 
then  be  deducted  from  the  total  Dasha  period.  The  result  will  be  the  balance  of  Dasha  at  birth 
in  years,  months  etc. 

93.  The  past  Kalas  (minutes)  of  the  Navahs,  in  which  Candr  may  be  placed,  should  be 
multiplied  by  the  years,  allotted  to  the  Dasha  and  the  product  should  be  divided  by  200.  The 
resulting  years  etc.  will  be  the  expired  portion  of  the  Dasha.  By  deducting  them  from  the  total 
number  of  years  the  balance  of  the  Dasha  at  birth  is  obtained. 

94-95.  In  the  Savya  Chakr  the  first  Ahs  is  called  Deha  and  the  last  Jiva.  The  opposite  is  the 
case  in  the  Apsavya  Chakr.  Therefore  the  calculations  should  be  based  on  the  Deha  etc.  in  the 
Savya  Chakr  and  on  the  Jiva  etc.  in  Apsavya. 

We  give  below  the  Savya  and  Apsavya  Kaal  Chakr  Charts.  For  Example.  The  birth  is  in 
Mrigashira  4th  Pad.  It  is  in  the  Apsavya  Kaal  Chakr.  The  Lord  of  Deha  is  Mangal  and  that  of 
Jiva  is  Guru.  The  Bhabhog  of  Mrigashira  is  59/31  (59  Ghatikas  31  Palas)  and  Bhayat  is  58/15 
(58  Ghatikas  15  Palas).  Vi  of  the  Bhabhog  comes  to  14/52/44.  That  would  be  the  value  of  one 
Pad.  Multiplying  this  by  3  will  get  Ghatikas  of  3  Padas,  namely  44/38/15.  Deducting  this  from 
Bhayat,  the  past  Ghatikas,  Palas  etc.  of  the  4th  Pad  will  be  13/36/45.  The  full  Dasha  years  are 
100.  Multiplying  this  by  13/36/45  we  get  1300/3600/4500  =  1361/15.  This  divided  by  15  will 
give  the  expired  period  at  birth,  namely  90  years  and  9  months.  See  the  Kaal  Chakr.  There  we 
count  from  Jiva  etc.  to  Deha.  In  the  4th  Pad  of  Mrigashira  Jiva  is  in  Dhanu  and  Deha  in  Mesh. 
Therefore,  by  deducting  the  total  of  years  from  Dhanu  to  Mithun,  namely  77,  from  90  years  9 
months,  we  get  the  expired  period  of  Vrishabh,  namely  13  years  and  9  months.  By  deducting 
this  from  the  present  16  years  of  Sukr,  we  will  get  2  years  and  3  months,  as  the  balance  of 
Dasha  at  birth.  Accordingly,  like  Vimshottari  Dasha,  the  order  of  Dasha  will  be  Vrishabh, 
Mesh,  Dhanu,  Vrischik  etc. 


For  Example.  Suppose,  that  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  person  in  Kritika  Nakshatr  the  longitude 
of  Candr  (Candr  Spast)  is  lr4°50'.  This  converted  into  Kalas  will  be  2090  at  birth.  The  Dasha 
should  be  taken,  as  commencing  from  that.  Divide  the  Kalas  by  800  (1  Nakshatr).  The  result 
will  be  the  2nd  Nakshatr,  namely  Bharini  and  the  remainder  will  be  490.  These  will  be  the  past 
Kalas  of  Kritika.  There  are  200  Kalas  in  one  Pad  (Navahs).  Divide  490,  the  past  Kalas  of 
Kritika,  by  200.  We  will  then  get  2,  as  past  Padas  and  the  remainder  90  will  represent  the  past 
Kalas  of  the  present  Nakshatr.  By  multiplying  this  by  83,  the  Dasha  years,  we  will  get  7470, 
which,  divided  by  200,  will  indicate  the  expired  portion  of  the  Dasha,  as  37  years,  4  months 
and  6  days.  By  deducting  the  years  of  Dehahs,  commencing  from  Vrishabh,  in  the  order 
Vrishabh,  Mesh,  Meen,  Kumbh  (16+7+10+4  =  37),  we  will  get  0  years,  4  months  and  6  days. 
This  will  be  the  expired  portion  of  Makar.  Deducting  this  from  4,  the  Dasha  period  of  Makar, 
we  get  the  balance  of  the  Dasha  of  Makar,  namely  3  years,  7  months  and  24  days.  See  in  this 
connection  the  Savya  Kaal  Chakr. 

Gati  of  Rasis  in  the  Kaal  Chakr 

96-98.  There  are  three  kinds  of  movements  (Gati)  of  the  Rasis  in  the  Kaal  Chakr,  namely 
Manduki,  Markati  and  Simhavlokan.  The  movement  of  one  Rasi  by  jumping  over  one  Rasi  is 
known,  as  Manduki  Gati.  Backward  movement  to  the  previous  Rasi  is  called  Markati  Gati. 
The  movement  of  a  Rasi  to  the  5th  and  9th  Rasi  is  said  to  be  Simhavlokan. 

99-100.  Movement  from  Kanya  to  Kark  and  from  Simh  to  Mithun  is  Manduki  Gati. 
Movement  from  Simh  to  Kark  is  Markati  Gati.  Movement  from  Meen  to  Vrischik  and  from 
Dhanu  to  Mesh  is  called  Simhavlokan  Gati. 

Effects  of  Dashas  of  Rasis,  as  a  Result  of  these  Gati 

101-102.  The  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasis  with  Manduki  Gati  in  the  Savya  Chakr  are 
distress  to  friends,  relations,  parents  and  elders  and  there  is  likely  to  be  cause  for  trouble  from 
poison,  weapons,  thieves  and  enemies.  In  the  Manduki  Dasha  of  the  Gati  of  a  Rasi  from  Simh 
to  Mithun  there  is  the  likelihood  of  the  death  of  the  mother,  or  self,  trouble  from  Government 
and  possibility  of  brain  fever. 

103.  The  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Rasi  with  Markati  Gati  in  the  Savya  Chakr  are  loss  of  wealth, 
agricultural  products  and  animals,  death  of  father,  or  an  elderly  close  relation  and  feeling  of 
lethargy. 

104-105.  The  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasis  with  Simhavlokan  Gati  in  the  Savya  Chakr  are 
possibility  of  injury  from  animals,  loss  of  amity  with  friends,  distress  to  near  relations, 
drowning  in  a  well,  fall  from  animals,  possibility  of  harm  from  poison,  weapons  and  diseases 
and  destruction  of  residential  dwelling. 

106-108.  In  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasis  with  the  Manduki  Gati  in  the  Apsavya  Chakr  the  effects 
will  be  distress  to  wife  and  conditions,  loss  of  children,  possibility  of  feverish  conditions  and 
loss  of  position.  In  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasis  with  the  Markati  Gati  there  may  be  danger  from 
watery  places,  loss  of  position,  distress  from  father,  punishment  from  Government  and 
wandering  in  the  forests;  with  the  Simhavlokan  there  may  be  destruction  of  the  dwelling  and 
death  of  father  etc. 


109-1 11.  If  the  movement  is  from  Meen  to  Vrischik,  the  native  may  suffer  from  fever;  if  from 
Kanya  to  Kark,  there  may  be  loss  of  brothers  and  kinsmen;  if  from  Simh  to  Mithun,  there  may 
be  ill  health  of  the  wife;  if  from  Simh  to  Kark,  the  native  may  die;  if  from  Dhanu  to  Mesh, 
there  may  be  death  of  uncles  and  similar  relations.  If  the  Rasi  is  yuti  with  a  malefic,  adverse 
conditions  may  be  expected  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi.  Favourable  effects  will  be  felt  in  its 
Dasha,  if  the  Rasi  is  yuti  with  a  benefic. 

112-113.  O  Brahmin!  In  the  Kaal  Chakr  Dasha  favourable  and  unfavourable  effects  may  be 
predicted,  after  taking  into  account  the  directions  of  the  Rasis  and  Grahas. 

1 14-119.  If  the  movement  is  from  Kanya  to  Kark,  good  results  are  realized  in  places,  located 
in  the  East  and  at  that  time  journeys  to  the  places  in  the  North  prove  fruitful.  Unfavourable 
effects  will  be  felt  in  places,  located  in  the  West  and  the  South.  It  will  be  advisable  not  to 
undertake  journeys  in  those  directions  in  the  Dasha  of  these  Rasis.  If  the  movement  is  from 
Simh  to  Mithun,  no  journey  should  be  undertaken  to  places,  located  in  the  East.  However,  the 
journeys  to  the  South-West  will  prove  fruitful  in  the  Dasha  of  those  Rasis.  If  the  movement  is 
from  Kark  to  Simh,  journeys  during  that  period  to  the  South  will  prove  unfavourable  and 
result  in  loss  and  the  native  has  to  return  from  the  South  to  the  West.  If  the  movement  is  from 
Meen  to  Vrischik,  there  will  distress,  if  the  native  goes  to  the  North.  The  same  would  happen, 
if  the  movement  is  from  Dhanu  to  Makar.  There  may  be  ill  health,  imprisonment,  or  death,  if 
the  movement  is  from  Dhanu  to  Mesh.  There  may  be  gains,  comforts  and  property  and 
marriage,  if  the  movement  is  from  Dhanu  to  Vrischik.  It  will  not  be  advisable  to  undertake 
journeys  to  the  West  during  the  related  period,  if  the  movement  is  from  Simh  to  Kark. 
Favourable  results  should  be  predicted,  if  the  Rasis  are  yuti  with  benefics  and  adverse,  if  the 
Rasis  are  yuti  with  malefics. 

120-122.  According  to  the  above-mentioned  Kaal  Chakr,  the  person,  born  in  the  Ahsas  of  the 
various  Rasis,  will  be,  as  under.  Mesh  Ahs  brave  and  a  thief,  Vrishabh  wealthy,  Mithun 
learned,  Kark  king,  Simh  respected  by  king,  Kanya  learned,  Tula  minister,  or  adviser,  Dhanu 
sinful,  Kumbh  businessman,  Meen  wealthy. 

123-128.  If  the  Deha,  or  Jiva  Rasis  are  yuti  with  Surya,  Mangal,  Sani,  or  Rahu,  the  native  will 
die.  Worse  results  may  be  expected,  if  the  Deha  and  Jiva  Rasis  are  yuti  with  two,  or  all  of 
them.  If  there  is  a  malefic  in  Deha  Rasi,  the  native  suffers  ill  health;  a  malefic  in  a  Jiva  Rasi 
will  make  the  native  very  timid.  If  the  Deha  and/or  Jiva  Rasi  are  yuti  with  two  malefics,  there 
will  be  distress  and  diseases.  Three  malefics  in  the  Deha  and/or  Jiva  Rasi  will  cause 
premature  death.  Four  malefics  in  the  Deha  and  Jiva  Rasi  will  cause  definite  death.  If  both  the 
Deha  and  Jiva  Rasis  are  occupied  by  malefics,  there  will  be  fear  from  king  and  thieves  and 
death  of  the  native.  If  Surya  is  in  the  Deha,  or  Jiva  Rasi,  there  will  be  danger  from  fire.  Candr 
in  the  Deha,  or  Jiva  Rasi  will  cause  danger  from  water,  Mangal  fear  from  weapons,  Budh  fear 
from  windy  troubles,  Sani  fear  from  Gulma  (a  disease),  Rahu  and  Ketu  fear  from  poison.  If 
the  Deha,  or  Jiva  Rasis  are  occupied  by  Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr,  the  native  will  be  wealthy,  will 
enjoy  all  kinds  of  comforts  and  will  have  good  health.  Mixed  results  may  be  expected,  if  the 
Deha  and  Jiva  Rasis  are  occupied  by  both  benefics  and  malefics. 

129-130.  In  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasis,  owned  by  malefics,  the  body  and  soul  will  be  in  distress. 
The  effects  will  be  favourable  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasis,  owned  by  benefics.  If  a  malefic  Rasi 
is  occupied  by  a  benefic  Grah,  or,  if  a  benefic  Rasi  is  occupied  by  a  malefic  Grah,  the  effects 
will  be  of  a  mixed  nature. 


Effects  of  Kaal  Chakr  Dasha  of  the  Rasis  in  Lagn  and  other  Bhavas. 

131-132.  In  the  Kaal  Chakr  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  in  Lagn  the  body  remains  healthy  and  the 
native  spends  a  life  with  many  kinds  of  comforts.  If  the  Lagn  Rasi  is  a  benefic  one,  the  good 
effects  are  realized  fully.  If  the  Lagn  Rasi  is  a  malefic  Rasi,  there  is  likelihood  of  ill  health.  If 
a  Grah  in  exaltation,  or  in  its  own  Rasi  occupies  Lagn,  the  native  is  respected  by  the  king,  or 
government  and  acquires  wealth. 

133-134.  In  the  Chakr  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  in  Dhan  the  native  receives  good  food,  enjoys 
happiness  of  wife  and  children,  gains  wealth,  achieves  progress  in  the  educational  sphere, 
becomes  a  clever  conversationalist  and  moves  in  good  society.  If  the  Rasi  be  a  benefic,  good 
effects  are  realized  in  full,  otherwise  the  effects  would  be  of  a  mixed  nature. 

135-136.  Happiness  from  co-borns,  valour,  patience,  comforts,  acquisition  of  gold,  ornaments 
and  clothes  and  recognition  by  the  king,  or  government,  are  the  effects  in  the  Kaal  Chakr 
Dasha  of  the  Rasi  in  Sahaj.  If  the  Rasi  is  a  benefic,  the  good  results  are  realized  in  full, 
otherwise  adverse  effects  may  also  be  experienced. 

137-138.  Good  relations  with  kinsmen,  acquisition  of  land,  houses,  or  a  kingdom, 
conveyances  and  clothes  and  enjoyment  of  sound  health,  are  the  effects  of  the  Chakr  Dasha  of 
the  Rasi  in  Bandhu.  If  the  Rasi  is  a  benefic  one,  the  good  effects  are  realized  in  full.  If  it  is  a 
malefic  Rasi,  adverse  results  are  also  experienced. 

139-140.  Being  blessed  with  wife  and  children,  favours  from  Government,  enjoyment  of 
sound  health,  good  relations  with  friends,  achievement  of  fame,  good  progress  in  the 
educational  sphere,  patience  and  valour  are  the  effects  of  the  Chakr  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  in  Putr. 
If  the  Rasi  is  a  benefic  one,  the  good  results  are  enjoyed  in  full.  If  the  Rasi  is  a  malefic  one, 
adverse  effects  are  also  experienced. 

141-142.  Danger  from  the  king,  fire  and  weapons  and  the  possibility  of  suffering  from 
diabetes,  Gulma  and  jaundice  are  the  effects  in  the  Chakr  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  in  Ari.  If  the  Rasi 
is  a  malefic  one,  the  above  adverse  effects  will  be  experienced  in  full.  There  will  be  some 
mitigation  of  the  evil  effects  in  the  case  of  a  benefic  Rasi. 

143-144.  Marriage,  conjugal  happiness,  being  blessed  with  children,  gain  of  agricultural 
products,  cows  and  clothes,  favours  and  recognition  from  the  king  and  achievement  of  fame, 
are  the  effects  in  the  Chakr  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  in  Yuvati.  The  beneficial  results  will  be 
experienced  in  full,  if  the  Rasi  is  a  benefic  one.  Meagre  good  effects  will  be  realized  in  the 
case  of  a  malefic  Rasi. 

145-146.  Destruction  of  a  residential  house,  distress,  loss  of  wealth,  poverty  and  danger  from 
enemies  are  the  effects  of  the  Chakr  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  in  Randhr.  The  adverse  effects  will  be 
realized  in  full,  if  the  Rasi  is  a  malefic  one.  Some  mitigation  in  evil  effects  may  be  expected 
in  the  case  of  a  benefic  Rasi. 

(147-157)  ... 
...Char 


158-166.  Now  I  will  tell  you  about  the  working  out  of  the  Dasha  years  of  Vrischik  and 
Kumbh.  If  both  the  Lords  of  the  two  Rasis,  Vrischik  and  Kumbh,  are  placed  in  their  own 
Rasis,  their  Dasha  will  be  of  12  years.  Otherwise  the  Dasha  will  be  of  the  number  of  years, 
indicated  by  the  number,  counted  from  that  Rasi  to  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  its  Lord.  If  one  Grah 
be  in  his  own  Rasi  and  the  other  in  any  other  Rasi,  the  Dasha  will  be  of  the  number  of  years 
counted,  from  the  above  first  Rasi  to  the  other.  If  the  Lords  are  in  different  Rasis,  the  counting 
is  to  be  done  up  to  the  Rasi,  which  is  stronger.  The  Rasi,  which  has  a  Grah,  placed  in  it,  is 
considered  more  powerful  than  the  Rasi  without  a  Grah  in  it.  If  both  are  with  Grahas  in  them, 
the  one  with  more  Grahas  would  be  considered  more  powerful.  If  both  Rasis  are  occupied  by 
an  equal  number  of  Grahas,  the  strength  of  the  Rasi  itself  should  be  taken  into  account.  The 
principle  for  considering  the  Bal  of  the  Rasi  is,  that  the  Fixed  Rasi  is  considered  stronger  than 
the  Movable  one  and  the  Dual  Rasi  is  considered  more  powerful  than  the  Fixed  Rasi.  If  there 
is  equality  in  the  strength  of  the  Rasis,  then  to  determine  the  number  of  years  of  Dasha 
counting  should  be  done  up  to  the  Rasi  with  bigger  number.  If  one  Rasi  is  occupied  by  a  Grah 
in  exaltation,  the  counting  should  be  done  up  to  that  Rasi  only.  In  addition  1  should  be  added 
in  the  number  of  years  in  the  case  of  a  Rasi  with  an  exalted  Grah  and  1  should  be  deducted 
from  the  number  of  years  in  the  case  of  a  Rasi  with  a  Grah  in  debilitation.  The  prediction 
should  be  made  after  calculating  the  Dashas  in  this  manner. 

167.  If  the  Rasi  in  Dharm  Bhava  is  in  an  odd  Pad,  the  counting  should  be  from  the  Rasi  in  the 
Lagn  onwards.  The  counting  would  be  in  the  reverse  order,  if  the  Pad  is  even.  The  Dashas  of 
Rasis  have  to  be  fixed,  keeping  this  in  view. 

For  Example.  In  the  above  Tula  is  the  Rasi  in  Dharm  Bhava  in  an  odd  Pad.  Amongst  the 
Lords  of  Lagn,  Sani  and  Rahu,  Rahu  is  associated  with  a  Grah.  Therefore  Rahu  is  more 
powerful  than,  Sani.  Therefore  counting  should  be  done  up  to  Rahu.  Kumbh  is  in  even  Pad, 
therefore  counting  has  to  be  done  from  Kumbh  up  to  Rahu  in  the  reverse  order,  by  which  the 
Char  Dasha  for  Kumbh  would  come  to  8  years.  Mesh  is  in  odd  Pad.  Therefore  the  Char  Dasha 
for  Mesh  will  be  one  year.  The  Dasha  of  other  Rasis  should  be  calculated  in  the  same  manner. 

Sthir 

168-169.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  Now  I  am  going  to  describe  the  Sthir  Dasha.  In  this  Dasha 
system  7,  8  and  9  years  are  the  Dasha  spans  of  the  Movable  (Char),  Fixed  (Sthir)  and  Dual 
(Dvisva  Bhava)  Rasis.  In  this  system  the  Dasha  of  the  12  Rasis  begins  from  the  Brahm  Grah 
Ashrit  Rasi.  The  Dashas  are  counted  onwards  from  the  odd  Rasis  and  in  the  reverse  order 
from  the  even  Rasis. 

170-173.  Maitreya  said.  O  great  Sage!  Now  please  enlighten  me  how  the  Brahm  Grah  is 
picked  out  in  a  chart.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  From  amongst  the  Lords  of  Ari,  Randhr  and 
Vyaya  the  Grah,  who  may  possess  the  greatest  strength  and  is  placed  in  Lagn,  or  in  Yuvati 
with  strength,  the  one,  placed  in  an  odd  Rasi  within  sixth  Bhava  from  the  Bhava  concerned,  is 
called  the  Brahm  Grah.  The  Lord  of  Randhr  in  Randhr  is  also  accepted,  as  Brahm  Grah.  If 
Sani,  or  Rahu/Ketu  obtain  Brahmatva  (qualifications  of  Brahm  Grah),  they  become  Brahm 
Grah.  If  a  number  of  Grahas  obtain  Brahmatva,  the  one  with  the  largest  number  of  degrees 
would  become  Brahm  Grah.  If  there  is  parity  in  the  degrees  of  such  Grahas,  the  most 
powerful  amongst  them  would  become  Brahm  Grah. 

Yogardha 


174.  The  spans  of  Dashas  of  the  Rasis  in  the  Yogardha  Dasha  system  are  half  of  the  total  of 
the  spans  of  Char  and  Sthir  Dashas.  The  Dasha  will  commence  from  the  Rasi  of  Lagn,  or 
Yuvati,  whichever  is  stronger.  The  order  of  the  Dashas  of  the  12  Rasis  will  be  counted 
onwards,  if  the  opening  Dasha  Rasi  is  an  odd  one.  If  it  be  an  even  Rasi,  the  Dashas  will  be  in 
reverse  order. 

Kendradi 

175-176.  In  this  system  there  are  Dashas  of  Fixed  Rasis  in  the  Kendr  etc.  from  Lagn,  or  from 
Yuvati,  whichever  is  stronger.  If  Lagn,  or  Yuvati  with  strength  is  placed  in  an  odd  Rasi,  the 
Kendr  etc.  are  counted  in  the  onward  order.  If  it  be  in  an  even  Rasi,  the  counting  will  be  in  the 
backward,  or  reverse  order.  In  them  also  the  Dashas  would  be  in  the  order  of  comparative 
strength  of  the  Rasis.  The  order  of  Dashas  would  be  the  same,  as  reckoned  from  the  Atma 
Karak.  The  spans  of  Dashas  would  be  the  same,  as  they  are  in  the  Char  Dasha.  In  calculating 
the  years  of  Dashas  of  Grahas,  counting  is  done  from  the  Grah  to  his  own  Rasi.  The  years  of 
Dashas  would  be  the  number,  arrived  at  by  counting  up  to  the  Rasi  of  the  Grah,  which  is 
stronger,  or  more  in  number. 

177.  If  a  Grah  owns  two  Rasis,  the  Dasha  years  will  be  equal  to  the  number,  which  is  greater, 
when  counted  from  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  him. 

Notes.  Under  this  system  Dashas  are  of  two  kinds,  namely  Lagn  Kendradi  and  Atma  Karak 
Kendradi.  There  are  also  Kendradi  Rasi  Dasha,  or  Kendradi  Grah  Dasha  in  both  the  Dasha 
systems,  mentioned  above. 

Karak 

178.  The  system,  under  which  the  first  Dasha  is  of  the  Atma  Karak  and  the  subsequent  Dashas 
are  of  the  remaining  7  Karakas  in  their  order  is  known,  as  Karak  Dasha.  In  this  system  the 
Dasha  years  are  equal  to  the  number  of  Rasis,  counted  from  Lagn  up  to  the  Karak  concerned. 

Manduk 

179-180.  Under  the  Manduk  Dasha  system  the  Dasha  commences  from  Lagn,  or  Yuvati 
Bhava,  whichever  is  stronger.  If  the  Rasi  of  commencement  is  an  odd  Rasi,  the  Dashas  of  3 
Movable,  3  Fixed  and  3  Dual  Rasis  will  be  counted  in  the  onwards  order.  They  will  be  in  the 
reverse  order  in  the  case  of  an  even  Rasi.  In  this  system  the  Dasha  years  will  be  the  same,  as 
in  Sthir  Dasha.  In  this  system  every  Dasha  is  of  the  next  3rd  Rasi. 

Shula 

181-182.  Some  sages  have  designed  the  Shula  Dasha  for  determining  the  time  of  death.  In  this 
system  the  Dasha  commences  from  Dhan,  or  Randhr,  whichever  is  stronger.  If  the  Rasi  is  an 
odd  one,  the  order  of  the  Dasha  Rasis  will  be  onwards.  It  will  be  backwards  in  the  case  of  an 
even  Rasi.  The  Dasha  years  in  this  system  are,  as  adopted  for  the  Sthir  Dasha.  There  is  a 
possibility,  that  death  appears  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Marak  Rasi,  which  has  greater  strength. 

Trikon 


183-184.  In  this  system  the  first  Dasha  commences  from  the  strongest  amongst  the  Rasis  in 
Kon  (Trikon)  to  Lagn  (Tanu,  Putr  and  Dharm).  This  system  is  similar  to  the  Char  Dasha.  Here 
also  the  Dashas  of  the  Rasis  will  be  in  the  onwards  order  in  the  case  of  odd  Rasis  and  in  the 
reverse  order  in  the  case  of  even  Rasis.  The  Dasha  years  will  be  similar  to  that  of  Char  Dasha. 
It  has  been  named  Trikon  because  of  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha  from  the  Rasis  in 
Konas. 

Dirga 

185-187.  In  this  system  the  order  of  the  Dashas  is,  as  follows:  the  Rasi,  occupying  Dharm,  the 
Rasis,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  the  Rasi  in  Dharm,  the  Rasi  in  Karm,  the  Rasis,  receiving  a 
Drishti  from  the  Rasi  in  Karm,  the  Rasi  in  Labh  and  the  Rasis,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  the 
Rasi  in  Labh.  As  this  system  is  mostly  based  on  Drishtis,  it  has  been  named,  as  Dirga  Dasha. 
Three  different  processes  are  adopted  for  the  Movable,  Fixed  and  Dual  Rasis  from  Dharm, 
Karm  and  Labh.  According  to  them,  Rasi,  which  receives  a  Drishti  from  the  Movable  Rasi,  is 
counted  backwards  and  the  Rasi,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  the  Fixed  Rasi,  is  counted  onwards. 
In  the  case  of  the  Dual  Rasi,  if  it  is  odd,  the  counting  is  onwards  and  the  order  is  backwards  in 
case  of  an  even  Rasi  for  the  Rasis,  receiving  a  Drishti. 

Notes.  The  intention  is,  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  Drishti  the  process  of  Rasi,  receiving  a 
Drishti,  should  be  started  from  the  Rasi,  which  is  nearest.  In  this  connection  readers  may  refer 
to  Rasi  Drishtikathan  Adhyaya,  Ch.  8,  Verse  9  and  the  table  after  that. 

Lagnadi  Rasi  Dasha 

188-189.  In  this  system  there  are  Dashas  of  all  the  12  Rasis,  including  Lagn,  in  every 
Nakshatr.  Consequently  the  Bhayat  at  birth  may  be  multiplied  by  12  and  then  the  product 
should  be  divided  by  Bhabhog.  The  Rasi,  degree  etc.  so  available  may  be  added  to  the 
longitude  of  Lagn.  From  the  Rasi,  becoming  available  by  doing  so,  will  start  the  Dashas  of  the 
12  Rasis.  (If  that  Rasi  is  odd,  the  counting  will  be  onwards.  It  will  be  in  the  reverse  order,  if 
the  Rasi  is  even) 

190.  For  finding  the  balance  of  Dasha  at  birth,  multiply  the  expired  degree  etc.  by  the  Dasha 
years  of  the  first  Dasha  Rasi  and  divide  it  by  30.  The  years  etc.  so  arrived  at  may  be  deducted 
from  the  Dasha  years.  The  result  will  indicate  the  balance  of  Dasha  at  birth  in  years,  months 
etc. 

Panch  Swar  Dasha 

191-194.  Beginning  from  Akaradhi  5  Swaras  (a,  i,  u,  e,  o),  write  underneath  them  the  Varnas 
in  6  lines.  Leave  out  the  letters  'na',  'na'  and  'na',  because  they  are  not  used  in  names.  If  they 
are  found  in  any  name,  'ga'  may  be  substituted  for  'na',  'ja'  for  'na'  and  'da'  for  'na'  for 
working  out  the  Dashas  and  making  predictions.  In  this  manner  the  Swar,  under  which  the 
first  Varna  of  the  name  of  the  native  is  found,  will  determine  the  order  of  the  Dashas  of  the 
five  Swaras.  Dashas  are  of  12  years  for  all  the  five  Swaras.  In  the  Dasha  of  every  Swar  there 
will  be  Antar  Dashas  of  all  the  five  Swaras  in  the  same  order. 

Yogini 


195-199.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  O  Brahmin!  I  have  already  given  you  the  description  of 
Panch  Swar  Dasha.  Now  I  will  acquaint  you  with  the  Yogini  Dasha,  as  described  by  Lord 
Mahadeva.  There  are  8  Yoginis,  namely  Mangal,  Pingal,  Dhanya,  Bhramari,  Bhadrika,  Ulka, 
Siddha  and  Sankat. 

Candr,  Surya,  Guru,  Mangal,  Budh,  Sani,  Sukr  and  Rahu  are  born  from  them.  Add  3  to  the 
Janm  Nakshatr  and  divide  it  by  8.  The  remainder  will  indicate  the  Yogini  Dasha  of  Mangal, 
etc.  The  Dashas  are  of  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7  and  8  years.  The  balance  of  Dasha  at  birth  should  be 
worked  out  from  the  Bhayat  and  Bhabhog  etc.,  as  already  explained  earlier. 

Pind,  Ans  and  Nisarg 

201-202.  The  Pind,  Ans  and  Nisarg  Dasha  will  be  the  same,  as  Pindayu,  Ahsayu  and 
Nisargayu,  the  method  of  determination  of  which  has  already  been  explained  previously.  The 
order  of  Dashas  will  be,  as  follows.  The  first  will  be  of  Lagn,  Surya,  or  Candr,  whoever  is 
stronger.  The  subsequent  Dashas  will  be  of  Grahas  in  Kendr  to  them,  then  of  Grahas  in 
Panaphara  Bhavas  and  lastly  in  Apoklima  Bhavas.  The  Dashas  and  Antar  Dashas  of  Lagn  and 
the  seven  Grahas  will  also  be  in  the  same  order. 

203.  The  effects  of  these  Dashas  will  be  in  accordance  with  Ashtak  Varg  Bal,  which  subject 
will  be  dealt  with  later.  These  Dashas  are  also  called  Ashtak  Varg  Dashas. 

Sandhya 

204.  Sandhya  is  the  Dvadashahs  Ayurdaya  of  the  Param  Ayurdaya  (maximum  possible  life- 
span). In  Sandhya  Dasha  the  Dasha  of  all  the  Rasis  from  Lagn  onwards  is  of  1/12  the  years  of 
Param  Ayurdaya. 

Pachak  Dasha  in  Sandhya  Dasha 

205-206.  By  multiplying  the  Dasha  years  of  Sandhya  Dasha  by  6  and  dividing  the  product  by 
31,  the  years,  months  etc.  so  arrived  at  may  be  put  in  one  apartment  of  a  Table.  Thereafter 
half  of  these  years,  months  etc.  may  be  written  in  the  next  three  apartments.  The  remaining  8 
apartments  may  be  filled  in  by  one  third  of  the  aforesaid  years,  months  etc.  In  this  manner 
Pachak  Dasha  in  Sandhya  Dasha  of  every  Bhava  can  be  worked  out  and  predictions  may  be 
made  from  it. 

Tar 

207-209.  O  Brahmin!  Some  sages  have  given  consideration  to  Tar  Dasha,  which  is  like 
Vimshottari.  In  this  Dasha  Janm,  Sampat  etc.  in  their  order  replace  Surya,  Candr  etc.,  placed 
in  Kendras.  This  Dasha  is  applied  in  those  cases  only,  where  there  are  Grahas  in  Kendras.  If 
there  are  a  number  of  Grahas,  the  first  Dasha  will  belong  to  the  strongest  amongst  them. 

210.  O  Brahmin!  I  have  now  completed  the  description  of  the  different  kinds  of  Dashas.  I  will 
give  the  description  of  their  Antar  Dashas  (sub-periods)  later. 

Ch.  47.  Effects  of  Dashas 


1.  Maitreya  said.  O  Maharishi  Parashar!  You  have  told  me  about  the  different  kinds  of 
Dashas.  Now  be  kind  enough  to  enlighten  me  with  the  effects  of  Dashas. 

2.  Maharishi  Parashar  replied.  O  Brahmin!  There  are  two  kinds  of  effects  of  Dashas:  general 
and  distinctive.  The  natural  characteristics  of  the  Grahas  cause  the  general  effects  and  the 
distinctive  effects  are  realized  by  their  placements  etc. 

3-4.  The  effects  of  the  Dashas  of  the  Grahas  are  in  accordance  with  their  strength.  The  effects 
of  a  Grah  in  the  first  Dreshkan  are  realized  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha.  The  Grah  in 
the  second  Dreshkan  makes  its  effects  felt  in  the  middle  of  the  Dasha.  The  effects  of  the  Grah 
in  the  third  Dreshkan  are  experienced  at  the  end  of  the  Dasha.  If  the  Grah  is  retrograde,  these 
effects  would  be  in  the  reverse  order.  The  Dasha  effects  of  Rahu  and  Ketu,  who  are  always 
retrograde,  will  always  be  realized  in  the  reverse  order. 

5-6.  The  effects  are  favourable,  if  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha  the  Dasha  Lord  is  in 
Lagn,  in  his  exaltation,  own,  or  a  Shant  Rasi.  The  results  are  unfavourable,  if  the  Dasha  Lord 
is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  in  his  debilitation,  or  in  an  inimical  Rasi. 

7-11.  During  the  Dasha  of  Surya  there  is  acquisition  of  wealth,  great  felicity  and  honours  from 
the  Government,  if  at  the  time  of  birth  Surya  is  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  in  a 
Kendr,  in  Labh,  be  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Dharm,  or  the  Lord  of  Karm  and  strong  in  his 
Varg.  The  native  will  be  blessed  with  a  son  (children),  if  Surya  is  with  the  Lord  of  Putr.  The 
native  will  acquire  elephants  and  other  kinds  of  wealth,  if  Surya  is  associated  with  the  Lord  of 
Dhan.  The  native  will  enjoy  comforts  of  conveyances,  if  Surya  is  associated  with  the  Lord  of 
Bandhu.  He  attains  a  high  position,  like  that  of  Army  Chief,  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king 
and  enjoys  all  kinds  of  happiness.  Thus  during  the  Dasha  of  a  strong  (and  favourable)  Surya 
there  are  acquisitions  of  clothes,  agricultural  products,  wealth,  honours,  conveyances  etc. 

12-15.  During  the  Dasha  of  Surya  there  will  be  anxieties,  loss  of  wealth,  punishment  from 
Government,  defamation,  opposition  by  kinsmen,  distress  to  father,  (in)auspicious  happenings 
at  home,  distress  to  paternal  and  maternal  uncles  etc.,  anxiety  and  inimical  relations  with  other 
people  for  no  reason  whatsoever,  should  Surya  be  in  his  Rasi  of  debilitation,  be  weak  in  Ari, 
Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or  be  associated  with  malefic  Grahas,  or  with  the  Lord  of  Ari,  Randhr,  or 
Vyaya.  There  will  be  some  favourable  effects  at  times,  if  in  the  above  situations  Surya 
receives  a  Drishti  from  benefic  Grahas.  The  effects  will  always  be  unfavourable,  when 
malefic  Grahas  give  a  Drishti  to  Surya. 

16-22.  O  Brahmin!  After  describing  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Surya  in  brief,  I  will  now 
come  to  the  effects  of  Vimshottari  Dasha  of  Candr.  During  the  Dasha  of  Candr  from  its 
commencement  to  the  end  there  will  be  opulence  and  glory,  good  fortune,  gain  of  wealth, 
auspicious  functions  at  home,  dawn  of  fortune,  attainment  of  a  high  position  in  Government, 
acquisition  of  conveyances,  clothes,  birth  of  children  and  acquisition  of  cattle,  should  Candr 
be  in  her  exaltation,  in  her  own  Rasi,  in  Kendr,  in  Labh,  Dharm,  or  Putr,  be  associated  with,  or 
receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics,  be  fully  powerful  and  is  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Karm, 
Dharm,  or  Bandhu.  There  will  be  extraordinary  gains  of  wealth  and  luxuries,  if  such  a  Candr 
is  in  Dhan  Bhava. 

23-26.  Should  Candr  be  waning,  or  in  her  debilitation  Rasi,  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth  in  her 
Dasha.  If  Candr  is  in  Sahaj,  there  will  be  happiness  off  and  on.  If  Candr  is  associated  with 
malefics,  there  will  be  idiocy,  mental  tension,  trouble  from  employees  and  mother  and  loss  of 


wealth.  If  waning  Candr  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or  is  associated  with  malefics,  there  will 
be  inimical  relations  with  Government,  loss  of  wealth,  distress  to  mother  and  similar  evil 
effects.  If  a  strong  Candr  is  placed  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  there  will  be  troubles  and  good 
times  off  and  on. 

27-32.  If  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  Multrikon,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  Kendr,  in  Labh,  or 
Dhan  Bhava  with  strength,  in  a  benefic  Ahs  (Navahs)  and  is  associated  with  a  benefic,  there 
will  be  during  his  Dasha  acquisition  of  kingdom  (attainment  of  a  high  administrative,  or 
political  position  in  Government,  gain  of  wealth  and  land,  recognition  by  Government),  gain 
of  wealth  from  foreign  countries  and  acquisition  of  conveyances  and  ornaments.  There  will 
also  be  happiness  and  good  relations  with  co-borns.  If  Mangal  with  strength  is  placed  in  a 
Kendr,  or  in  Sahaj,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth  through  valour,  victory  over  enemies, 
happiness  from  wife  and  children.  There  will,  however,  be  a  possibility  of  some  unfavourable 
effects  at  the  end  of  the  Dasha. 

33.  If  Mangal  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  weak,  in  an  inauspicious  Bhava,  or  is  associated  with, 
or  receives  a  Drishti  from  malefics,  there  will  be  in  his  Dasha  loss  of  wealth,  distress  and 
similar  unfavourable  effects. 

34-39!/2.  In  order  to  clarify  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Rahu  I  shall  first  mention  the  exaltation 
and  debilitation  Rasis  of  Rahu  and  Ketu.  The  exaltation  Rasi  of  Rahu  is  Vrishabh.  The 
exaltation  Rasi  of  Ketu  is  Vrischik.  The  Multrikonas  of  Rahu  and  Ketu  are  Mithun  and 
Dhanu.  The  own  Rasis  of  Rahu  and  Ketu  are  Kumbh  and  Vrischik.  Some  sages  have 
expressed  the  view,  that  Kanya  is  the  own  Rasi  of  Rahu  and  Meen  is  the  own  Rasi  of  Ketu. 
Should  Rahu  be  in  his  exaltation  Rasi  etc.,  there  will  be  during  the  Dasha  of  Rahu  great 
happiness  from  acquisition  of  wealth,  agricultural  products  etc.,  acquisition  of  conveyances 
with  the  help  of  friends  and  Government,  construction  of  a  new  house,  birth  of  sons 
(children),  religious  inclinations,  recognition  from  Government  of  foreign  countries  and  gain 
of  wealth,  clothes  etc.  If  Rahu  be  associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics,  be  in  a 
benefic  Rasi  and  be  in  Tanu,  Bandhu,  Yuvati,  Karm,  Labh,  or  Sahaj,  there  will  be  during  his 
Dasha  all  kinds  of  comforts  by  the  beneficence  of  the  Government,  acquisition  of  wealth 
through  a  foreign  Government,  or  sovereign  and  felicity  at  home. 

40-43.  If  Rahu  is  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  Bhava,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  all  kinds  of 
troubles  and  distress.  If  Rahu  is  associated  with  a  malefic,  or  a  Marak  Grah,  or  is  in  his 
debilitation  Rasi,  there  will  be  loss  of  position,  destruction  of  his  residential  house,  mental 
agony,  trouble  to  wife  and  children  and  misfortune  of  getting  bad  food.  There  will  be  loss  of 
wealth  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha,  some  relief  and  gain  of  wealth  in  his  own  country 
and  distress  and  anxieties  during  the  last  portion  of  the  Dasha. 

44.  Now  I  am  going  to  describe  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Guru,  the  great  benefic  and 
preceptor  of  the  Gods. 

45-48.  If  Guru  is  in  his  exaltation,  his  own  Rasi,  his  Multrikon,  in  Karm,  Putr,  or  Dharm 
Bhava,  in  his  own  Navahs,  or  in  his  exalted  Navahs,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha: 
acquisition  of  kingdom,  great  felicity,  recognition  by  Government,  acquisition  of  conveyances 
and  clothes,  devotion  to  deities  and  Brahmins,  happiness  in  respect  of  his  wife  and  children 
and  success  in  the  performance  of  religious  sacrifices  (oblations). 


49-51.  If  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  combust,  associated  with  malefics,  or  in  Ari,  or 
Randhr,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  loss  of  residential  premises,  anxiety,  distress  to 
children,  loss  of  cattle  and  pilgrimage.  The  Dasha  will  give  some  unfavourable  effects  at  its 
commencement  only.  During  the  later  part  of  the  Dasha  there  will  be  good  effects,  like  gain  of 
wealth,  awards  from  and  recognition  by  Government. 

52.  Now  I  will  describe  to  you  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  who  is  considered  the  vilest 
and  most  inferior  amongst  all  the  Grahas. 

53-56.  If  Sani  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  Multrikon,  or  friendly  Rasi,  in  his 
own,  or  exalted  Navahs  and  in  Sahaj,  or  Labh,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  recognition  by 
Government,  opulence  and  glory,  name  and  fame,  success  in  the  educational  sphere, 
acquisition  of  conveyances  and  ornaments  etc.,  gain  of  wealth,  favours  from  Government, 
attainment  of  a  high  position,  like  Commander  of  an  Army,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom, 
benevolence  of  goddess  Lakshmi,  gain  of  property  and  birth  of  children. 

57-60.  If  Sani  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or  combust,  there  will  be 
during  his  Dasha  ill  effects  from  poison,  injury  from  weapons,  separation  from  father,  distress 
to  wife  and  children,  disaster,  as  a  result  of  displeasure  of  Government,  imprisonment  etc.  If 
Sani  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  associated  with  a  benefic,  is  placed  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a 
Trikon,  in  Dhanu,  or  in  Meen,  there  will  be  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  conveyances  and 
clothes. 

61.  Now  I  am  going  to  describe  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  who  is  called  a  Kumar  (in 
his  teens)  amongst  all  the  Grahas. 

62-65.  If  Budh  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own,  in  a  friendly  Rasi,  or  in  Labh,  Putr,  or  Dharm, 
there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  acquisition  of  wealth,  gain  of  reputation,  improvement  in 
knowledge,  benevolence  of  Government,  auspicious  functions,  happiness  from  wife  and 
children,  good  health,  availability  of  sweetish  preparations,  profits  in  business  etc.  If  Budh 
receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  is  in  Dharm,  or  is  the  Lord  of  Karm,  the  aforesaid  beneficial 
results  will  be  experienced  in  full  and  there  will  be  great  felicity  all-round. 

66-70.  If  Budh  is  associated  with  a  malefic,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  punishment  by 
Government,  inimical  relations  with  kinsmen,  journey  to  a  foreign  country,  dependence  on 
others  and  the  possibility  of  urinary  troubles.  If  Budh  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  there  will 
be  loss  of  wealth,  due  to  indulgence  in  lascivious  activities,  possibility  of  suffering  from 
rheumatism  and  jaundice,  danger  of  thefts  and  malevolence  of  Government,  loss  of  land  and 
cattle  etc.  At  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  there  will  be  gains  of  wealth, 
betterment  in  the  educational  sphere,  birth  of  children  and  happiness.  In  the  middle  of  the 
Dasha,  there  will  be  recognition  from  Government.  The  last  part  of  the  Dasha  will  be 
distressful. 

71.  Now  I  will  tell  you  about  the  Dasha  of  Ketu,  who  is  a  headless  trunk  (Kabandha)  amongst 
all  the  Grahas. 

72-77.  If  Ketu  is  in  a  Kendr,  a  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  in  a  benefic  Rasi,  in  his  exaltation,  or  in  his 
own  Rasi,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  cordial  relations  with  the  king,  desired  headship  of  a 
country,  or  village,  comforts  of  conveyances,  happiness  from  children,  gain  from  foreign 
countries,  happiness  from  wife  and  acquisition  of  cattle.  If  Ketu  is  in  Sahaj,  Ari,  or  Labh, 


there  will  be  in  his  Dasha  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  good  relations  with  friends  and 
opportunities  for  the  acquisition  of  elephants.  At  the  commencement  of  the  Ketu  Dasha  there 
will  be  Raj  Yog.  During  the  middle  portion  of  the  Dasha  there  will  be  possibilities  of 
fearfulness  and  in  the  last  part  there  will  be  sufferings  from  ailments  and  journeys  to  distant 
places.  If  Ketu  is  in  Dhan,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic,  there  will 
be  imprisonment,  destruction  of  kinsmen  and  residential  premises  and  anxieties,  company  of 
menials  and  diseases. 

78.  Now  I  will  describe  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Sukr,  who  is  the  incarnate  of  intoxication, 
ecstasy,  delight  and  pride  amongst  all  the  Grahas. 

79-82.  If  Sukr  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  a  Kendr,  or  a  Trikon,  there  will  be 
during  his  Dasha  acquisition  of  fancy  clothes,  ornaments,  conveyances,  cattle  and  land  etc., 
availability  of  sweet  preparations  every  day,  recognition  from  the  sovereign,  luxurious 
functions  of  songs  and  dances  etc.  by  the  benevolence  of  Goddess  Lakshmi.  If  Sukr  is  in  his 
Multrikon,  during  his  Dasha  there  will  definitely  be  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  acquisition  of  a 
house,  birth  of  children  and  grandchildren,  celebration  of  marriage  in  the  family,  attainment 
of  a  high  position,  like  the  Commander  of  an  Army,  visits  of  friends,  recovery  of  lost  wealth, 
property,  or  kingdom. 

83-841/2.  If  Sukr  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  inimical  relations 
with  kinsmen,  distress  to  wife,  losses  in  business,  destruction  of  cattle  and  separation  from 
relations. 

85-87.  If  Sukr  is  in  Bandhu,  as  Lord  of  Dharm,  or  Karm,  there  will  be  during  his  Dasha 
attainment  of  rulership  of  a  country,  or  village,  performance  of  pious  deeds,  like  building  of 
reservoirs  and  temples  and  giving  grains  etc.  in  charity,  availability  of  sweet  preparations 
every  day,  vigor  in  work,  name  and  fame  and  happiness  from  wife  and  children. 

88-89.  Similar  are  the  effects  of  Sukr  in  his  sub-periods.  If  Sukr  is  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati, 
there  will  be  during  his  Dasha  physical  pains  and  troubles.  To  get  alleviation  from  those 
troubles  the  native  should  perform  Shatarudriya,  or  Mrityunjaya  Japa  in  the  prescribed 
manner  and  give  in  charity  a  cow,  or  female  buffalo. 

Ch.  48.  Distinctive  Effects  of  the  Nakshatr  Dasha,  or  of  the 
Dashas  of  the  Lords  (Vimshottari)  of  various  Bhavas 

1.  If  the  Lord  of  Karm  is  placed  in  an  auspicious  Bhava  in  his  exaltation  Rasi  etc.,  his  Dasha 
effects  will  be  favourable.  The  effects  will  be  adverse,  if  the  Lord  of  Karm  is  in  his 
debilitation  Rasi  and  occupies  an  inauspicious  Bhava.  This  proves,  that  an  inauspicious  Grah 
in  his  exaltation  Rasi  etc.  will  not  produce  unfavourable  results,  if  placed  in  an  auspicious 
Bhava  and  a  benefic,  being  in  his  debilitation  Rasi  and  being  placed  in  an  inauspicious  Bhava, 
will  produce  adverse  effects.  Now  I  will  describe  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  the  Lords  of 
various  Bhavas,  who  are  related  to  each  other. 

2-4.  There  will  be  physical  well-being  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Lagn,  distress  and 
possibility  of  death  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Dhan,  unfavourable  effects  in  the  Dasha  of  the 
Lord  of  Sahaj,  acquisition  of  house  and  land  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Bandhu,  progress  in 


educational  sphere  and  happiness  from  the  children  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Putr  and 
danger  from  enemies  and  ill  health  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Ari. 

5-8.  There  will  be  distress  to  wife  and  the  possibility  of  the  death  of  the  native  in  the  Dasha  of 
the  Lord  of  Yuvati,  the  possibility  of  death  and  financial  losses  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of 
Randhr,  improvement  in  the  educational  sphere,  religious-mindedness  and  unexpected  gains 
of  wealth  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Dharm,  recognition  from  and  awards  by  the 
Government  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Karm,  obstacles  in  gains  of  wealth  and  the  possibility 
of  diseases  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Labh  and  distress  and  danger  from  diseases  in  the 
Dasha  of  the  Lord  of  Vyaya.  A  Grah,  placed  in  an  auspicious  Bhava,  like  Trikon  etc.,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Dasha,  produces  favourable  results  in  his  Dasha.  The  Grah,  placed  in 
Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  at  that  time,  yields  only  adverse  results  during  his  Dasha.  It  is  therefore 
essential,  that  the  placement  of  a  Grah  at  the  time  of  birth  and  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Dasha  should  both  be  taken  into  account  for  the  assessment  of  the  Dasha  effects. 

14-17V2.  The  Dasha  of  Ari's,  Randhr' s,  or  Vyaya's  Lord  also  becomes  favourable,  if  they  get 
associated  with  the  Lord  of  a  Trikon.  If  the  Lord  of  a  Kendr  is  in  a  Trikon,  or  the  Lord  of  a 
Trikon  is  in  a  Kendr,  the  Dasha  of  the  Grah,  yuti  with  either  of  them,  becomes  favourable. 
The  Dasha  of  a  Grah,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  the  Lord  of  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon  is  also 
favourable.  If  Dharm' s  Lord  is  in  Lagn  and  Lagn's  Lord  is  in  Dharm,  the  Dashas  of  both  of 
them  will  produce  extremely  beneficial  results.  There  will  be  acquisition  of  a  kingdom  in  the 
Dashas  of  Lagn's  Lord  and  Karm's  Lord,  if  Karm' s  Lord  is  in  Lagn  and  Lagn's  Lord  is  in 
Karm. 

18-20.  The  Dasha  of  Sahaj's,  Ari's  and  Labh's  Lord,  of  the  Grahas,  placed  in  Sahaj,  Ari  and 
Labh  and  of  the  Grahas,  yuti  with  the  above,  will  prove  unfavourable.  The  Dasha  of  the 
Grahas,  associated  with  the  Lords  of  Marak  Bhavas,  namely  Dhan  and  Yuvati,  in  Dhan,  or 
Yuvati  and  the  Dashas  of  the  Grahas,  placed  in  Randhr,  will  produce  unfavourable  effects. 
Thus  the  Dashas  should  be  considered  favourable,  after  taking  into  account  the  placement  of  a 
Grah  and  his  relationship  of  one  Grah  with  the  other.  (Rahu  and  Ketu  give  favourable  results 
in  Sahaj,  Ari  and  Labh). 

Ch.  49.  Effects  of  the  Kaal  Chakr 

1-5.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  O  Brahmin!  I  am  now  going  to  describe  to  you  the  effects  of  the 
Kaal  Chakr  Dasha. 

During  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  owned,  or  occupied  by  Surya,  there  will  be  ill  health,  due  to  the 
blood,  or  bile  troubles;  . . .  Candr,  there  will  be  gain  of  wealth  and  clothes,  name  and  fame  and 
birth  of  children;  . . .  Mangal,  there  will  be  bilious  fever,  gout  and  wounds;  . . .  Budh,  there  will 
be  acquisition  of  wealth  and  birth  of  children;  . . .  Guru,  there  will  be  increase  in  the  number  of 
children,  acquisition  of  wealth  and  enjoyment;  . . .  Sukr,  there  will  be  acquisition  of  learning, 
marriage  and  gain  of  wealth;  . . .  occupied  by  Sani,  there  will  be  all  kinds  of  adverse 
happenings. 

The  Effects  of  the  Dashas  on  the  Basis  of  the  Navans  of  each  Rasi 

6-7.  In  the  Kaal  Chakr  Dasha  of  Mesh  in  Mesh  Navans  there  will  be  distress,  due  to  troubles, 
caused  by  the  pollution  of  blood.  In  the  Dasha  of  Mesh  in  the  Navans  of  Vrishabh  there  will 
be  increase  in  wealth  and  agricultural  product.  In  the  Navans  of  Mithun  there  will  be 


advancement  of  knowledge.  In  the  Navans  of  Kark  there  will  be  acquisition  of  wealth,  in  the 
Simh  Navans  danger  from  enemies,  in  the  Kanya  distress  to  wife,  in  the  Tula  kingship,  in  the 
Vrischik  death  and  in  the  Dhanu  acquisition  of  wealth.  Such  will  be  the  effects  of  the  9  Padas 
of  Mesh.  In  assessing  the  net  effects  the  nature  of  the  Grah,  occupying  the  Rasi,  should  also 
be  taken  into  account. 

8-10.  In  the  Dasha  of  Makar  Navans  in  Vrishabh  there  will  be  tendency  to  perform 
undesirable  deeds  along  with  more  adverse  effects.  In  the  Kumbh  Navans  there  will  be  profits 
in  business,  in  the  Meen  success  in  all  ventures,  in  the  Dasha  of  Vrischik  Navans  danger  from 
fire,  in  the  Dasha  of  Tula  Navans  recognition  from  Government  and  reverence  from  all,  in  the 
Dasha  of  Kanya  Navans  danger  from  enemies,  in  the  Dasha  of  Kark  Navans  distress  to  wife, 
in  the  Dasha  of  Simh  Navans  diseases  of  eyes  and  in  the  Dasha  of  Mithun  Navans  obstacles  in 
earning  livelihood.  Such  will  be  the  effects  of  the  9  Navahsas  of  Vrishabh.  Similar 
interpretation  should  be  made  of  further  verses  on  this  subject. 

11-12.  In  Mithun  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Vrishabh  Ahs  there  will  be  acquisition  of  wealth,  in  the 
Dasha  of  Mesh  Ahs  attacks  of  fever,  in  the  Dasha  of  Meen  Ahs  affectionate  relations  with 
maternal  uncle,  in  the  Dasha  of  Kumbh  Ahs  increase  in  the  number  of  enemies,  in  the  Dasha 
of  Makar  Ahs  danger  from  thieves,  in  the  Dasha  of  Dhanu  Ahs  increase  in  the  stock  of 
weapons,  in  the  Dasha  of  Vrishabh  Ahs  injury  by  some  weapon  and  in  the  Dasha  of  Mithun 
Ahs  enjoyment. 

13-15.  In  Kark  in  the  Dasha  of  Kark  Ahs  there  will  be  distress,  . . .  Simh  displeasure  of  the 
sovereign,  . . .  Kanya  reverence  from  kinsmen,  . . .  Tula  beneficence,  . . .  Vrischik  creation  of 
obstacles  by  father,  . . .  Dhanu  increase  of  learning  and  wealth,  . . .  Makar  danger  from  water, 
. . .  Kumbh  increase  in  the  production  of  agricultural  products  and  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Meen 
Ahs  acquisition  of  more  wealth  and  enjoyment. 

16-17.  In  Simh  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Navans  of  Vrischik  there  will  be  distress  and  disputes,  . . . 
Tula  extraordinary  gains,  . . .  Kanya  gains  of  wealth,  . . .  Kark  danger  from  wild  animals,  . . . 
Simh  birth  of  a  son,  . . .  Mithun  increase  of  enemies,  . . .  Vrishabh  gains  from  sale  of  cattle,  . . . 
Mesh  danger  from  animals  and  in  the  Dasha  of  Meen  Ahs  journeys  to  distant  places. 

18-19.  In  Kanya  in  the  Dasha  of  Kumbh  Ahs  there  will  be  acquisition  of  wealth,  . . .  Makar 
financial  gains,  . . .  Dhanu  mingling  with  kinsmen,  . . .  Mesh  happiness  from  mother,  . . . 
Vrishabh  birth  of  children,  . . .  Mithun  increase  in  enemies,  . . .  Kark  love  with  some  woman, 
. . .  Simh  aggravation  of  diseases  and  in  the  Dasha  of  Kanya  Ahs  birth  of  children. 

20-22.  In  Tula  in  the  Dasha  of  Tula  Ahs  there  will  be  financial  gains,  . . .  Vrischik  good 
relations  with  kinsmen,  . . .  Dhanu  happiness  from  father,  . . .  Makar  disputes  with  mother,  . . . 
Kumbh  birth  of  a  son  and  financial  gains,  . . .  Meen  entanglement  with  enemies,  . . .  Vrischik 
disputes  with  women,  . . .  Tula  danger  from  water  and  in  Dasha  of  Kanya  Ahs  more  financial 
gains. 

23-24/4.  In  Vrischik  in  the  Dasha  of  Kark  Ahs  there  will  be  financial  gains,  . . .  Simh 
opposition  to  the  king,  . . .  Mithun  acquisition  of  land,  . . .  Vrishabh  financial  gains,  . . .  Mesh 
danger  from  reptiles,  . . .  Meen  danger  from  water,  . . .  Kumbh  profits  in  business,  . . .  Makar 
profits  in  business,  . . .  Makar  possibility  of  suffering  from  diseases  and  in  the  Dasha  of  Dhanu 
Ahs  financial  gains. 


25-27 '.  In  Dhanu  in  the  Dasha  of  Mesh  Ahs  there  will  be  financial  gains,  . . .  Vrishabh 
acquisition  of  more  land,  . . .  Mithun  success  in  ventures,  . . .  Kark  success  all  round,  . . .  Simh 
increase  in  the  accumulated  wealth,  . . .  Kanya  disputes,  . . .  Tula  financial  gains,  . . .  Vrischik 
affliction  with  diseases,  . . .  Dhanu  happiness  from  children. 

28-29.  In  Makar  in  the  Dasha  of  Makar  Ahs  there  will  be  happiness  from  children,  . . .  Kumbh 
gain  of  agricultural  products,  . . .  Meen  well  being,  . . .  Vrischik  danger  from  poison,  . . .  Tula 
financial  gains,  ...  Kanya  increase  in  enemies,  ...  Kark  acquisition  of  property,  ...  Simh 
danger  from  wild  animals  and  in  the  Dasha  of  Mithun  Ahs  danger  of  falling  from  a  tree. 

30-32.  In  Kumbh  in  the  Dasha  of  Vrishabh  Ahs  there  will  be  financial  gains,  . . .  Mesh 
diseases  of  the  eyes,  . . .  Meen  journeys  to  distant  places,  . . .  Kumbh  increase  in  wealth,  . . . 
Makar  success  in  all  kinds  of  ventures,  . . .  Dhanu  more  enemies,  . . .  Mesh  loss  of  happiness 
and  enjoyment,  . . .  Vrishabh  death,  . . .  Mithun  well  being. 

33-34/4.  In  the  Meen  in  the  Dasha  of  Kark  Ahs  there  will  be  increase  in  wealth,  . . .  Simh 
recognition  by  Government,  . . .  Kanya  financial  gains,  . . .  Tula  gains  from  all  sources,  . . . 
Vrischik  fever,  . . .  Dhanu  more  enemies,  . . .  Makar  conjugal  disputes,  . . .  Kumbh  danger  from 
water  and  in  the  Dasha  of  Meen  Ahs  good  fortune  all-round.  In  this  manner  on  the  Kaal 
Chakr,  prepared  on  the  basis  of  Pad  of  the  Janm  Nakshatr,  the  Dashas  of  the  Navahs  Rasis  and 
their  duration  can  be  assessed  and  prediction  can  be  made  for  the  whole  life  of  the  native. 
Appropriate  remedial  measures  (recitation  of  Mantras,  oblations  etc.)  should  be  taken  to 
alleviate  the  adverse  effects,  caused  by  malefic  Dashas. 

35-37.  The  effects  of  Dasha  in  Raj  Yog  etc.  have  already  been  described  in  Vol.  I  of  this 
book.  The  same  should  be  applied  in  a  judicious  manner  in  the  Kaal  Chakr.  These  are  in  brief 
effects  of  Kaal  Chakr  Dasha. 

Ch.  50.  Effects  of  the  Char  etc.  Dashas 

1-3.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  O  Brahmin!  I  have  already  described  the  Char  etc.  Dashas.  Now 
I  am  going  to  tell  you  the  effects  of  these  Dashas.  The  effects  of  the  Dashas  of  the  Rasis 
should  be  judged  from  the  strength  of  the  Lords  of  Rasis  and  whether  they  are  benefics,  or 
malefics.  If  the  Lord  of  a  Rasi  possesses  full  strength,  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  will 
be  realized  in  full.  The  effects  of  the  Dasha  will  be  of  medium  nature,  if  the  strength  is 
medium.  If  the  Lord  of  Rasi  possesses  little  strength,  the  effects  will  be  experienced 
accordingly. 

4-10.  If  there  are  malefics  in  the  8th,  the  5th  and  the  9th  from  a  Dasha  Rasi,  the  effects  of  the 
Dasha  of  that  Rasi  will  be  distressful.  If  there  are  malefics  in  the  3rd  and  the  6th  from  a  Dasha 
Rasi,  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  will  be  victory  over  enemies  and  happiness.  If  there  are  benefics 
in  the  3rd  and  the  6th  from  the  Dasha  Rasi,  there  will  be  defeat  in  its  Dasha.  If  there  are 
benefics,  or  malefics  in  the  1 1th  from  the  Dasha  Rasi,  there  will  be  conquests  and  happiness  in 
the  Dasha.  If  the  Dasha  Rasi  is  occupied  by,  or  is  owned  by  a  benefic,  the  effects  of  its  Dasha 
will  be  beneficial.  If  a  Dasha  Rasi,  owned  by  a  benefic,  is  occupied  by  a  malefic,  favourable 
effects  will  be  experienced  in  the  first  part  of  the  Dasha  and  they  will  be  adverse  in  the  latter 
part.  If  a  Dasha  Rasi,  owned  by  a  malefic  is  occupied  by  a  benefic,  the  effects  of  the  Dasha 
will  be  the  same.  A  Dasha  Rasi,  owned  and  occupied  by  a  malefic  will  always  yield 
unfavourable  results.  The  reverse  will  be  the  case  in  the  case  of  the  Dasha  Rasi,  owned  and 
occupied  by  a  benefic.  If  a  Dasha  Rasi,  owned  by  a  benefic,  is  occupied  by  both  benefic  and 


malefic  Grahas,  the  effects  of  Dasha  will  be  adverse  in  its  first  part  and  favourable  in  the  latter 
part. 

11-17.  The  assessment  of  the  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  the  Dasha  Rasi  should  be  made  after 
taking  into  account  the  disposition  of  the  Grahas  in  the  Rasi  at  birth  and  the  disposition  of 
Grahas  during  the  Dasha.  If  the  Dasha  Rasi  is  well  disposed  both  at  the  time  of  birth  and 
during  its  Dasha,  the  beneficial  results  will  be  realized  in  full.  If  it  is  ill-disposed  during  the 
Dasha,  the  effects  will  be  of  mixed  nature.  If  the  Dasha  Rasi  is  ill-disposed  both  at  the  time  of 
birth  and  during  its  Dasha,  only  evil  effects  will  be  experienced. 

18-19.  The  effects  of  the  Dasha  will  be  favourable,  if  it  is  occupied  by  a  benefic  and  there  is 
also  a  benefic  in  the  Rasi  previous  to  it.  If  the  Rasi  is  occupied  by  a  malefic,  the  effects  will 
be  of  adverse  nature.  If  there  are  benefics  in  Putr  and  Dharm,  the  effects  of  its  Dasha  will  be 
favourable.  The  reverse  will  be  the  case,  if  Putr  and  Dharm  are  occupied  by  malefics. 

20-21.  Kumbh,  Vrishabh,  Simh  and  Vrischik  are  Badhak  Bhavas  for  the  four  Movable  Rasis: 
Mesh,  Kark,  Tula  and  Makar.  In  other  words  the  1 1th  Rasi  to  a  Movable  Rasi  is  its  Badhak 
Bhava.  If  there  is  a  malefic  in  the  Bhava,  occupied  by  its  Lord,  or  in  Badhak  Bhava  of  that 
Rasi,  there  will  be  occasions  of  great  sorrow,  imprisonment  and  diseases  during  the  Dasha. 

22.  The  Dasha  of  a  Rasi  will  be  favourable,  if  it  is  occupied  by  its  own  Lord,  or  an  exalted 
Grah.  The  Dasha  of  a  Rasi,  not  occupied  by  any  Grah,  will  be  adverse. 

23-25.  There  will  be  great  danger,  imprisonment  during  a  journey,  displeasure  of  Government 
and  danger  from  enemies  in  the  Dasha  and  Antar  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  from  which  its  Badhak 
Bhava,  Vyaya,  Ari  and  Randhr  are  occupied  by  Rahu.  There  will  be  loss,  due  to  the 
displeasure  of  the  king  and  danger  therefrom  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  that  is  occupied 
by  Surya,  Mangal,  Rahu  and  Sani.  There  will  be  the  possibility  of  death,  if  the  5th  and  the  9th 
from  the  Antar  Dasha  Rasi  are  occupied  by  a  debilitated,  or  malefic  Grah. 

26-28.  There  will  be  enjoyment,  acquisition  of  chiefship  of  a  town,  or  village,  birth  of  a  son, 
financial  gains,  well-being,  dawn  of  fortune,  attainment  of  the  position  of  a  Commander  of  an 
Army  and  progress  all-round,  if  there  is  an  exalted  Grah  in  the  Trikon  from  the  Antar  Dasha 
Rasi.  There  will  be  in  his  Dasha  financial  gains,  well-being  and  birth  of  a  son,  if  the  Grah, 
who  is  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  happens  to  be  in  a  benefic  Rasi  and  receives  a  Drishti  from 
Guru. 

29-32.  Vrishabh,  Tula,  Makar,  Kumbh  and  Mithun  are  the  inimical  Rasis  of  Surya.  The 
inimical  Rasis  of  Candr  and  other  Grahas  may  be  reckoned  similarly.  If  a  Grah  is  in  an 
inimical  Rasi,  his  Dasha  will  be  full  of  adversities.  The  effects  of  the  Dasha  of  Rasis  and 
Grahas  should  be  judged  after  taking  into  account  the  above  rules. 

33-34.  The  Dashas  of  that  Grah  will  be  favourable,  who  is  Raj  Yog  Karak,  who  is  disposed 
between  two  benefics  (that  is  there  are  benefics  in  the  2nd  and  the  12th  Bhavas  to  that  Grah) 
and  who  has  benefics  in  the  2nd,  3rd  and  4th  Bhavas  from  him.  A  malefic  Grah  becomes 
favourable,  if  he  is  disposed  between  benefics. 

35-36.  The  whole  of  the  Dasha  of  a  Grah,  who  is  related  to  a  friendly  and  benefic  Grah  at  the 
commencement  and  the  end  of  the  Dasha,  will  be  favourable.  In  an  unfavourable  Dasha  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  a  benefic  (Grah,  or  Rasi)  becomes  favourable.  The  Dasha  of  a  Grah,  or  Rasi, 


who  has  benefics  in  the  5th,  or  the  9th  from  it,  is  also  favourable.  In  this  manner  the  effects  of 
the  Dasha  should  be  judged,  after  taking  into  account  the  dispositions  of  the  Grah,  or  Rasi  at 
the  commencement  and  at  the  end  of  the  Dasha. 

37-39.  The  Dasha  of  the  Grahas  and  Rasis,  who  have  benefics  in  the  Trikon  from  them  is 
favourable.  If  the  Dasha  of  a  benefic  Rasi  commences  in  a  benefic  Rasi,  it  will  be  very 
favourable.  If  an  evil  Dasha  commences  in  a  benefic  Rasi,  it  is  also  favourable.  Therefore  the 
commencement  of  a  Dasha  should  always  be  kept  in  view  in  assessing  the  results  of  the 
Dasha.  There  will  be  loss  of  fortune,  if  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha  there  is  a  malefic 
Rasi,  or,  if  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  Rasi  is  in  debilitation. 

40-41.  There  will  be  loss  of  fortune,  wealth  and  agricultural  products  and  infliction  with 
disease  during  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  a  debilitated  Grah,  or,  if  there  is  a 
debilitated  Grah  in  the  5th  from  it,  or  in  the  9th  from  it,  or  whose  Lord  is  debilitated,  or  related 
to  a  debilitated  Grah. 

42.  Four  Rasis  from  Kumbh  and  four  Rasis  from  Vrischik  belong  to  Rahu  and  Ketu, 
respectively.  If  Rahu  and  Ketu  are  in  any  one  of  the  aforesaid  Rasis,  the  Dasha  will  be 
productive  of  beneficial  results. 

43-45.  If  a  Grah,  whose  Dasha  is  otherwise  considered  favourable,  is  placed  in  a  Marak 
Bhava,  or,  if  the  Rasi,  in  which  his  Dasha  comes  to  an  end,  receives  a  Drishti  from  Sukr,  or 
Candr,  there  will  be  in  his  Dasha  displeasure  of  government  and  loss  of  wealth. 

46-47.  There  will  be  loss  of  everything,  imprisonment,  death,  exile  from  the  country  and  great 
distress  at  the  end  of  the  Dasha  of  Rahu.  The  above  effects  will  definitely  be  realized,  if  there 
are  malefics  in  the  5th  and  the  9th  from  Rahu.  Beneficial  and  adverse  effects  should  be 
predicted  in  this  manner. 

48-50.  The  same  would  be  the  effects  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  malefics,  like 
Rahu  etc.  The  association  of  a  Marak  Grah  with  the  Rasi  at  the  time  of  commencement  of  its 
Dasha  is  not  productive  of  good  effects.  If  such  a  Grah  is  Rahu,  there  will  be  imprisonment, 
or  loss  of  wealth. 

51-52.  The  natural  characteristics  of  the  Bhava,  occupied  by  Rahu,  are  harmed  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Dasha.  If  such  a  Bhava  is  Dhan,  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth.  If  Candr 
and  Sukr  are  in  Vyaya,  there  will  be  losses,  due  to  the  displeasure  of  government.  If  Mangal 
and  Ketu  are  so  disposed,  there  will  be  death,  or  danger  from  fire.  There  will  be  acquisition  of 
a  kingdom,  if  Sukr  and  Candr  are  in  Dhan  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha.  This  means, 
that  the  effects  of  the  Bhava,  in  which  Candr  and  Sukr  are  placed  at  the  commencement  and 
end  of  a  Dasha,  are  strengthened.  Thus  their  disposition  in  Ari,  Randhr  and  Vyaya  will 
produce  only  adverse  effects. 

53-55.  Similarly  the  sages  have  described  the  effects  of  the  Bhava  with  Argal.  If  there  is  an 
auspicious  Argal  causing  benefic,  or  malefic  Grah  of  a  Rasi  and  Lagn  receives  a  Drishti  from 
him,  that  Rasi  will  prevail.  Here  Lagn  is  the  secondary  condition.  If  the  Grah,  causing 
uninterrupted  Argal,  gives  a  Drishti  to  a  Rasi,  that  Rasi  will  prevail.  In  other  words  good 
effects  will  be  derived  in  the  Dasha  of  that  Rasi.  The  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  which  does  not 
receive  a  Drishti  from  an  auspicious  Argal,  or  the  Dasha  of  a  Rasi  with  Vipreet  Argal  will  not 


be  favourable.  The  Dasha  of  that  Rasi,  which  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic,  will  be 
favourable. 

56-59.  Financial  gains  will  be  derived  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  which  is  occupied  by  its 
benefic  Lord,  or  by  an  exalted  Grah,  who  receives  a  Drishti  from  him.  There  will  be  loss  of 
wealth,  if  such  a  Grah  is  in  the  12th  Bhava  to  the  Rasi  (or  Bhava).  There  will  be  destruction  of 
all  good  effects,  distress  to  children  and  father  and  mental  agony  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  if 
there  are  malefics  in  the  5l  and  the  9X  from  the  Rasi.  Evil  effects  will  be  experienced  in  the 
Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  which  is  occupied  by  Randhr's  Lord,  Vyaya's  Lord,  Surya,  Mangal,  or 
Sani. 

60-63.  The  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  will  cause  distress  to  children,  exile  to  a  foreign  country  and 
continuous  disturbances  in  life,  if  Rahu  and  Ketu  are  in  the  Trikon  to  the  Rasi.  There  will  be 
danger  from  enemies,  from  the  king  and  disease  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  which  is  so  posited, 
that  the  6th  and  the  8th  from  it  are  occupied  by  malefic,  debilitated,  or  combust  Grahas.  There 
will  be  destruction  of  house,  land  and  agricultural  fields,  if  there  is  a  malefic,  or  debilitated 
Grah  in  the  4th  from  the  Rasi.  There  will  be  loss  of  house,  due  to  negligence,  if  such  a  Grah  is 
Mangal.  There  will  be  heart  pain  and  danger  from  government,  if  the  Grah  is  Sani  and  there 
will  be  losses  all  round  and  danger  from  poison  and  thieves,  if  the  Grah  is  Rahu. 

64-66!/2.  There  will  be  pilgrimage  to  holy  places  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  who  has  Rahu  in  the 
10th  to  it.  There  will  be  gain  of  earnings,  religious  rites,  gain  of  wealth,  renown  for  good  deeds 
and  success  in  efforts  and  ventures  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  which  is  so  posited,  that  the  10th, 
the  1 1th  and  the  9th  from  it  are  occupied  by  benefics.  There  will  be  birth  of  children,  happiness 
from  wife  and  recognition  by  the  Government  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  from  which  the  5X , 
the  7th  and  the  9th  are  occupied  by  benefic,  or  exalted  Grahas.  During  the  Dasha  of  the  Bhavas 
(Rasis),  occupied  by  Putr's,  Labh's,  Karm's,  Bandhu's,  Dharm's  and  Lagn's  Lord,  there  will 
be  growth  of  these  Bhavas.  The  good  effects  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the 
Bhavas  and  the  Grahas,  occupying  them. 

67-70.  In  the  Dasha  of  a  Rasi  (Bhava)  there  will  be  well-being,  increase  in  opulence  and  glory 
and  devotion  to  deities  and  Brahmins,  if  it  is  occupied  by  Guru,  Sukr,  or  the  Lord  of  a  Trikon. 
There  will  be  acquisition  of  more  conveyances  and  cattle  etc.  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi 
(Bhava),  which  is  so  posited,  that  the  4th  from  it  is  occupied  by  an  exalted  Grah,  or  Lord  of  a 
Trikon.  Candr  there  will  give  things,  like  grains,  Ghl  etc.  Full  Candr  will  favour  with  a 
treasure  and  jewels  etc.  Sukr  there,  will  provide  enjoyment  from  music  etc. 

71-72.  There  will  be  enjoyment  of  the  palanquin-like  conveyance  in  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi 
(Bhava),  from  which  the  4th  is  occupied  by  Guru.  There  will  be  success  in  all  ventures,  great 
opulence  and  glory,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom  during  the  Dasha  of  a  Rasi  (Bhava),  which  has 
the  Yog  of  the  Lord  of  Lagn,  Dharm's  Lord,  Karm's  Lord,  an  exalted  Grah,  or  benefics.  The 
effects  of  the  Dashas  of  various  Bhavas  should  be  judged  in  this  manner. 

73-77.  The  effects  of  the  Dashas  of  each  Rasi,  or  Grah  (Nakshatr  Dasha)  depend  on  their  18 
different  kinds  of  conditions.  They  are  deep  exaltation,  exaltation,  dispositions  on  their  either 
side,  Multrikon,  own,  Adhimitr,  TatkalikMitra's,  neutral,  enemy's,  Adhisatru's  Rasi,  deep 
debilitation,  debilitated,  or  enemy's  Varg,  own  Varg,  disposition  in  a  Kendr,  disposition  in  a 
Trikon,  defeated  in  war  between  Grahas,  deep  combustion. 


78-83  V2.  Acquisition  of  kingdom,  enjoyment  and  acquisition  of  more  property  are  the  effects 
of  the  whole  Dasha  of  the  Grah,  who  is  in  deep  exaltation  and  is  fully  equipped  with  all  the 
six  kinds  of  strength,  great  opulence  and  glory  with  some  possibility  of  affliction  with  disease 
are  the  effects  of  the  Grah,  placed  in  his  Rasi  of  exaltation.  The  Dasha  of  a  Grah  in  deep 
debilitation  is  called  Rikt.  Diseases,  loss  of  wealth  and  danger  of  death  are  the  effects  of  the 
Dasha  of  such  a  Grah.  The  Dasha  of  the  Grah,  who  is  in  a  condition  in  between  deep 
exaltation  and  deep  debilitation  is  known,  as  Avrohini  (descending).  The  Dasha  of  the  Grah  in 
exaltation,  or  in  a  friend's  Rasi  is  called  Madhya  (of  middle  order).  This  Dasha  also  yields 
moderately  good  effects.  The  Dasha  of  a  Grah,  placed  in  a  condition  in  between  deep 
debilitation  and  deep  exaltation,  is  called  Rohini  (ascending).  The  Dasha  of  a  Grah,  placed  in 
between  the  debilitated  and  enemy  Navahs  is  called  Adham  (evil).  Dangers  of  various  kinds, 
distress  and  sorrows  are  the  results  of  the  Dasha  of  such  a  Grah.  These  Dashas  give  results, 
according  to  their  nomenclature. 

84-87.  The  Dashas  of  other  Grahas  become  auspicious  and  augment  the  fortune,  if  the  Lord  of 
Dharm  and  Guru  are  in  any  way  related  with  Yog,  Kendr,  or  the  Bhava  concerned  etc.  The 
Grah  with  Yog  of  good  fortune  at  birth  produces  good  effects,  when  he  is  free  from 
retrogression  and  becomes  direct.  The  weakness,  inabilities  and  Yogas  of  other  Grahas  should 
also  be  taken  into  account  in  judging  their  effects.  All  those  Dashas  give  full,  medium  and 
little  effects  in  accordance  with  the  disposition  of  the  Grahas  in  the  Kendr,  Panaphara  and 
Apoklima. 

SS-S^A  The  Grahas  in  Shirshodaya,  Ubhayodaya  and  Prishthodaya  Rasis,  yield  their  results, 
respectively,  at  the  commencement,  in  the  middle  and  at  the  end  of  the  Dasha.  All  the  Grahas 
yield  auspicious  results  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Naisargik  (natural,  constant)  and  Tatkalik 
(according  to  position)  friends.  The  results  will  be  adverse  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  inimical 
Grahas. 

Antar  Dashas  of  Rasis 

90-96.  There  are  Antar  Dashas  of  the  12  Rasis,  commencing  from  the  Rasi,  in  which  the  Lord 
of  the  Dasha  is  placed.  There  will  be  auspicious  results,  like  acquisition  of  kingdom  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  a  Rasi,  which  is  occupied  by  its  own  Lord,  or  a  friendly  Grah.  There  will  be 
inauspicious  results,  like  loss  of  wealth,  disputes,  danger  from  diseases  etc.  in  the  Antar 
Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  which  may  be  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or  is  occupied  by  a  malefic, 
debilitated  Grah,  or  a  Grah,  placed  in  an  inimical  Rasi.  The  Rasi,  which  contained  more 
auspicious  marks  in  the  Ashtak  Varg  will  yield  benefic  effects  in  its  Antar  Dasha.  Adverse 
will  be  the  effects  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  which  contains  more  inauspicious  marks. 
For  assessing  the  results  the  Rasi,  from  which  the  Dasha  commences,  should  be  treated,  as 
Lagn  and  the  Bhavas  thereafter  should  be  assumed  to  have  the  characteristics,  as  if  they  are  so 
from  Lagn.  Thus  the  2nd  Bhava  from  that  Rasi  will  be  the  Bhava  of  the  wealth,  the  3rd  of  co- 
borns  and  so  on.  There  will  be  gains,  or  losses  of  Dhatus  etc.,  assigned  to  the  Rasis  and  the 
Grahas,  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  the  Rasis  concerned.  In  judging  the  effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas 
of  the  Grahas  their  benefic  and  malefic  nature,  relations  with  the  malefic,  or  benefic,  Drishtis 
on  them  and  their  disposition  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  etc.  should  all  be  kept  in  view. 

97.  The  results  of  the  Antar  Dasha' s  Pratyantar  Dashas  of  the  Rasis  should  be  assessed  in  the 
manner,  explained  in  this  chapter. 


Ch.  51.  Working  out  of  Antar  Dashas  of  Grahas  and  Rasis 
in  Vimshottari  etc.  Dasha  systems 

1.  For  finding  out  the  span  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  a  Grah  in  the  Dasha  of  the  same,  or  another 
Grah  multiply  the  Dasha  years  of  the  former  with  the  Dasha  years  of  the  latter  and  divide  the 
product  by  the  total  Dasha  years  of  all  the  Grahas.  For  finding  out  the  span  of  the  Pratyantar 
Dasha  of  the  same,  or  any  other  Grah  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  another  Grah  multiply  the  years 
etc.  of  the  Antar  Dasha  with  the  Dasha  years  of  the  other  Grah  and  divide  the  product  by  the 
total  Dasha  years  of  all  the  Grahas.  The  figure  so  available  in  months  etc.  will  represent  the 
Pratyantar  Dasha  of  the  former. 

2.  In  every  Dasha  the  first  Antar  Dasha  belongs  to  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  Then  the  further 
Antar  Dashas  belong  to  the  other  8  Grahas  in  the  same  order,  as  followed  for  the  Dashas.  The 
same  applies  to  Pratyantar  Dasha. 

The  Antar  Dashas  of  Char  Grahas  in  Char  etc.  Dasha 

3-4.  The  Antar  Dashas  of  the  Charadi  Kendradi  Dasha  of  the  Grahas  are  worked  out  by 
dividing  the  Dasha  years  by  9.  The  first  Dasha  will  invariably  be  of  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 
Thereafter  there  will  be  Antar  Dashas  of  Grahas,  placed  in  Kendras,  Panapharas  and 
Apoklimas,  respectively,  according  to  their  strength. 

Antar  Dashas  of  Rasis 

5.  The  Antar  Dashas  of  Rasis  is  worked  out  by  dividing  the  Dasha  years  by  12.  Pratyantar 
Dashas  of  the  Antar  Dashas  are  also  calculated  in  the  same  manner. 

6.  The  Antar  Dashas  will  start  from  the  Dasha  Rasi,  or  from  the  Rasi  7th  therefrom,  whichever 
is  stronger.  The  Antar  Dashas  are  in  the  onwards  order,  if  the  Dasha  Rasi  is  odd  and  in  the 
reverse  order,  if  it  is  even. 

7-12.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  will  acquaint  you  with  the  special  characteristics  of  the  order  of  the 
Antar  Dashas  of  the  Rasis.  If  the  Dasha  Rasi  is  a  Movable  one,  the  Antar  Dashas  of  the  12 
Rasis  are  in  the  onwards,  or  reverse  order.  If  the  Dasha  Asraya  Rasi  is  a  Fixed  one,  the  Antar 
Dashas  will  start  from  it  and  thereafter  there  will  be  an  Antar  Dasha  of  every  sixth  Rasi.  If  the 
Dasha  Ashraya  Rasi  is  a  Dual  one,  the  first  Antar  Dasha  will  belong  to  it.  Thereafter  there  will 
be  Antar  Dashas  of  Rasis  in  Kendr  to  it,  Rasis  in  Kendr  to  the  5th  from  it  and  Rasis  in  Kendr 
to  the  9th  from  it.  In  the  case  of  all  kinds  of  Rasis,  namely  Movable,  Fixed,  or  Dual,  the  order 
will  be  onwards,  if  the  Dasha  Asraya  Rasi  is  an  odd  one  and  in  the  reverse  order,  if  it  is  an 
even  one.  The  so  called  Dasha  Asraya  Rasi  is  known,  as  Pak  Rasi.  In  the  first  order  Rasi, 
which  is  Pak  Rasi,  is  also  called  Bhog  Rasi.  Later,  if  the  Dasha  Prad  Rasi  is  even,  then  the 
Bhog  Rasi  will  be  that,  which  is  at  the  same  Rasi  distance,  as  the  Dasha  Asraya  Rasi  is  from 
the  Dasha  Prad  Rasi.  For  the  Char,  Sthir  and  Trikon  Dasha,  the  Pak  and  Bhog  should  be 
determined  in  this  manner.  If  Pak  and  Bhog  Rasis  are  associated  with  malefics,  there  will  be 
pain  in  the  body  and  mental  agony.  There  will  be  enjoyment,  if  they  are  associated  with 
benefics.  In  the  Kaal  Chakr  Dasha,  like  the  Vimshottari  Dasha  system,  the  span  of  Dasha 
should  be  multiplied  by  the  span  of  the  Dasha  of  the  Rasi,  whose  Antar  Dasha  is  required  and 
the  product  should  be  divided  by  the  total  Dasha  years  of  (all)  the  Rasi(s).  The  years,  months 
etc.  as  arrived  at  will  represent  the  Antar  Dasha  of  the  Rasi  concerned. 


13-16.  Now  I  will  tell  you  the  method  of  working  out  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Pinda,  Ahs  and 
Nisarg  Dashas.  The  Lord  of  Dasha  is  Dasha  Pachak  of  full  part,  the  Grah,  associated  with,  is 
Pachak  of  Vi  part,  the  Grah  in  Trikon  from  him  is  Pachak  of  1/3  part  and  the  Grah  in  the  4l 
and  8l  from  him  are  Pachak  of  Vi  part,  the  Grah  in  the  7*  from  him  is  Pachak  of  1/7  part  of  the 
Dasha.  No  Grah  in  any  other  Bhava  is  Antar  Dash  Pachak.  In  this  manner  there  are  Antar 
Dasha  Pachakas  in  the  above-mentioned  Bhavas  from  the  various  Bhavas,  including  Lagn.  In 
any  of  such  Bhavas,  if  there  are  more  than  one  Grah,  then  the  one,  who  is  the  strongest 
amongst  them  will  be  the  Pachak.  Take  the  fractions  and  reduce  them  in  equivalent  fractions 
with  a  common  denominator.  Add  up  the  aliquot  parts  of  the  Dasha,  representative  of  the 
various  numerators,  leaving  out  the  denominators.  The  Antar  Dashas  will  be  arrived  at,  when 
the  various  aliquots  are  converted  into  years,  months  etc.  within  the  main  Dasha  and  divided 
by  the  above  sum.  (The  calculations,  given  above,  are  not  the  literal  translation  of  the  text  in 
the  verses  concerned,  but  their  actual  meaning  and  sense.  This  has  been  got  confirmed  by 
checking  up  with  similar  information,  given  in  Kalyana  Varma's  Saravali  and  Varamihir's 
Brihat  Jatak) 

Ch.  52.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Surya 
(Vimshottari) 

1-3.  Good  effects,  like  acquisition  of  wealth  and  grains  etc.,  are  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of 
Surya  in  his  own  Dasha,  if  Surya  is  exalted,  in  his  own  Bhava,  in  Labh,  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a 
Trikon.  Adverse  results  will  be  experienced,  if  Surya  is  debilitated,  or  in  an  inauspicious 
Bhava,  or  Rasi.  Medium  effects  will  be  realized,  if  Surya  is  in  other  houses.  If  Surya  is  the 
Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati,  there  will  be  danger  of  premature  death,  or  death-like  sufferings. 
The  remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  are  Mrityunjaya  Japa,  or  the  worship  of  Surya  (by 
recitation  of  appropriate  Mantras,  charily  etc.). 

4-6.  Functions,  like  marriage  etc.,  gain  of  wealth  and  property,  acquisition  of  a  house,  of  land, 
cattle  and  conveyances  etc.  will  be  the  effects  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr  in  the  Dasha  of 
Surya,  if  Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon.  There  will  be  marriage  of  the  native,  birth  of 
children,  beneficence  of  and  favours  from  kings  and  fulfillment  of  all  ambitions,  if  Candr  is  in 
his  exaltation  Rasi,  or  in  his  own  Rasi. 

7-10.  Distress  to  wife  and  children,  failures  in  ventures,  disputes  with  others,  loss  of  servants, 
antagonism  with  the  king  and  destructions  of  wealth  and  grains  will  be  the  effects,  if  Candr  is 
waning,  or  is  associated  with  malefics.  Effects,  like  danger  from  water,  mental  agony, 
imprisonment,  danger  from  diseases,  loss  of  position,  journeys  to  difficult  places,  disputes 
with  coparceners,  bad  food,  trouble  from  thieves  etc.,  displeasure  of  the  king,  urinary  troubles, 
pains  in  the  body  will  be  experienced,  if  Candr  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya. 

1  l-12x/4.  Luxuries,  comforts,  pleasures,  dawn  of  fortune  (Bhagyodaya),  increase  in  the 
enjoyment  from  wife  and  children,  acquisition  of  kingdom,  performance  of  marriage  and 
religious  functions,  gain  of  garments,  land  and  conveyance  and  birth  of  children  and 
grandchildren  will  be  the  auspicious  effects,  if  there  are  benefics  in  the  1st,  the  9th,  or  a  Kendr 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 


13-14.  Unpalatable  food,  or  course  food,  exile  to  outside  places  etc.  will  be  the  effects  in  the 
Antar  Dasha,  if  Candr  is  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Candi 
is  weak.  There  will  be  premature  death,  if  Candr  is  the  Lord  of  a  Marak  Bhava.  To  acquire 


peace  and  comfort,  the  remedial  measure  is  giving  in  charity  of  a  white  cow  and  a  female 
buffalo  (Mahishi). 

15-18.  Auspicious  effects,  like  acquisition  of  land,  gain  of  wealth  and  grains,  acquisition  of  a 
house  etc.  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the  Dasha  of  Surya,  if  Mangal  is  in 
his  exaltation  Rasi,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon.  All-round  gains,  attainment  of 
the  position  of  a  Commander  of  the  Army,  destruction  of  enemies,  peace  of  mind,  family 
comforts  and  increase  in  the  number  of  co-borns  will  be  the  effects,  if  Mangal  is  yuti  with  the 
Lagn'sLord. 


19-20.  Brutality,  mental  ailment,  imprisonment,  loss  of  kinsmen,  disputes  with  brothers  and 
failure  in  ventures  will  result,  if  Mangal  is  in  the  8th,  or  in  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dash 
if  Mangal  is  associated  with  malefics,  or,  if  Mangal  is  without  dignity  and  strength. 


21-22.  Destruction  of  wealth  by  the  displeasure  of  the  king  will  be  the  effect,  if  Mangal  is  in 
his  debilitation  Rasi,  or  be  weak.  Diseases  of  the  mind  and  body  will  result,  if  Mangal  is  the 
Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati  Bhava.  Recovery  from  ill  health,  increase  in  longevity  and  success  in 
adventures  are  possible,  if  remedial  measure,  like  recitation  of  Vedas,  Japa  and  Vrashotsarg 
are  performed  in  the  prescribed  manner. 

23-261/2.  In  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Surya,  if  Rahu  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a 
Trikon  from  Lagn,  there  will  be  in  the  first  two  months  loss  of  wealth,  danger  from  thieves, 
snakes,  infliction  of  wounds  and  distress  to  wife  and  children.  After  2  months  inauspicious 
effects  will  disappear  and  enjoyment  and  comforts,  sound  health,  satisfaction,  favours  from 
the  king  and  government  etc.  will  be  the  favourable  effects,  if  Rahu  is  yuti  with  benefics,  or,  if 
Rahu  is  in  the  Navahs  of  a  benefic.  Recognition  from  the  king,  good  fortune,  name  and  fame, 
some  distress  to  wife  and  children,  birth  of  a  son,  happiness  in  the  family  etc.  will  be  derived, 
if  Rahu  is  in  an  Upachaya  from  Lagn,  if  Rahu  is  associated  with  a  Yog  Karak,  or  is  placed 
auspiciously  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

27-29.  Imprisonment,  loss  of  position,  danger  from  thieves  and  snakes,  inflection  of  wounds, 
happiness  to  wife  and  children,  destruction  of  cattle,  house  and  agricultural  fields,  diseases, 
consumption  (Gulma  -  enlargement  of  the  skin),  dysentery  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Rahu  is 
weak,  or  is  in  the  81  ,  or  in  the  12*  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

30-31.  Adverse  effects,  like  premature  death  and  danger  from  snakes  will  be  derived,  if  Rahu 
is  in  Dhan,  or  Yuvati,  or,  if  Rahu  is  associated  with  the  Lords  of  either  of  these  Bhavas. 
Worship  of  Goddess  Durga,  Japa,  giving  in  charity  of  a  black  cow,  or  female  buffalo  are  the 
remedial  measures  for  alleviation  of  the  above  evil  effects,  or  total  escape  from  them. 

32-331//2.  Marriage  of  the  native,  favours  by  the  king,  gain  of  wealth  and  grains,  birth  of  a  son, 
fulfillment  of  the  ambitions  by  the  beneficence  of  the  sovereign  and  gain  of  clothes  will  be  the 
auspicious  effects,  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  the  Dasha  of  Surya,  if  Guru  is  in  a 
Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon  to  Lagn,  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  his  own  Varg. 

34-36.  Acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  comforts  of  conveyance,  like  palanquin  (motor  car  in  the 
present  times),  gain  of  position  etc.  will  result,  if  Guru  is  the  Lord  of  Dharm,  or  Karm.  Better 
fortune,  charities,  religious  inclinations,  worship  of  deities,  devotion  to  preceptor,  fulfillment 
of  ambitions  will  be  the  auspicious  effects,  if  Guru  is  well  placed  with  reference  to  the  Lord 
of  the  Dasha. 


37-39.  Distress  to  wife  and  children,  pains  in  the  body,  displeasure  of  the  king,  non- 
achievement  of  desired  goals,  loss  of  wealth,  due  to  sinful  deeds,  mental  worries  etc.  will 
result  in  his  Antar  Dasha,  if  Guru  is  in  the  6th,  or  in  the  8th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or  is 
associated  with  malefics.  Giving  in  charity  gold,  a  tawny-coloured  cow  (Kapila  Gaya), 
worship  of  Isht  Lord  (Isht  Dev)  are  the  remedial  measures  to  obtain  alleviation  of  the  evil 
effects  and  to  achieve  good  health  and  happiness. 

40-42.  Destruction  of  foes,  full  enjoyment,  some  gain  of  grains,  auspicious  functions,  like 
marriage  etc.  at  home  will  be  the  good  effects,  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the 
Dasha  of  Surya,  if  Sani  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon  from  Lagn.  Well-being,  acquisition  of 
more  property,  recognition  by  the  king,  achievement  of  renown  in  the  country,  gain  of  wealth 
from  many  sources  will  be  the  effects,  if  Sani  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own,  in  a  friendly 
Rasi  and,  if  Sani  is  yuti  with  a  friendly  Grah. 

43-44.  Rheumatism,  pains,  fever,  dysentery-like  disease,  imprisonment,  loss  in  ventures,  loss 
of  wealth,  quarrels,  disputes  with  coparceners,  claimants  etc.  will  be  the  effects  in  the  Antar 
Dasha,  if  Sani  is  in  the  8th,  or  the  12l  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or  is  associated  with 
malefics. 

45-47.  There  will  be  loss  of  friends  at  the  commencement,  good  effects  during  the  middle  part 
and  distress  at  the  end  of  the  Dasha.  In  addition  to  other  evil  effects  there  will  be  separation 
from  parents  and  wandering,  if  Sani  be  in  his  Rasi  of  debilitation.  If  Sani  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan, 
or  Yuvati,  there  will  be  danger  of  premature  death.  Giving  in  charily  black  cow,  buffalo,  goat 
and  Mrityunjaya  Japa,  are  the  remedial  measures  for  obtaining  relief  from  the  evil  effects  of 
the  Antar  Dasha.  These  measures  help  to  achieve  happiness  and  gain  of  wealth  and  property. 

48-49V/2.  Acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  enthusiasm  and  vivacity,  happiness  from  wife  and 
children,  acquisition  of  conveyance  through  the  beneficence  of  the  sovereign,  gain  of  clothes, 
ornaments,  pilgrimage  to  holy  places,  acquisition  of  a  cow  etc.  will  be  the  good  effects  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Budh  in  the  Dasha  of  Surya,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon  from  Lagn. 

50-5 IV2.  Budh  becomes  very  beneficial,  if  he  gets  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Dharm. 
Reverence  from  and  popularity  amongst  people,  performance  of  pious  deeds  and  religious 
rites,  devotion  to  the  preceptor  and  deities,  increase  in  wealth  and  grains  and  birth  of  a  son, 
will  be  the  auspicious  effects,  if  Budh  is  in  Dharm,  Putr,  or  Karm. 

52-53  V2.  Marriage,  offering  of  oblations,  charity,  performance  of  religious  rites,  name  and 
fame,  becoming  famous  by  assuming  another  name,  good  food,  becoming  happy,  like  Indra, 
by  acquiring  wealth,  robes  and  ornaments  will  be  the  effects,  if  Budh  is  in  an  auspicious 
Bhava,  like  a  Trikon  etc.  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

54-57.  Body  distress,  disturbance  of  peace  of  mind,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  will  be  the 
evil  effects  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  he  is  in  the  6l  ,  the  8* ,  or  the  12*  from  the  Lord  of 
the  Dasha  (Budh  cannot  be  in  the  6th,  or  the  8th  from  Surya).  There  will  be  evil  effects  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  some  good  effects  in  the  middle  part  of  the  Antar  Dasha 
and  the  possibility  of  displeasure  of  the  king  and  exile  to  a  foreign  country  at  the  end  of  the 
Dasha.  If  Budh  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati,  there  will  be  pains  in  the  body  and  attacks  of 
fever.  For  relief  from  the  evil  effects  and  to  regain  good  health  and  happiness  the  remedial 
measures  are  the  recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam  and  giving  in  charily  grains  and  an  idol, 
made  of  silver. 


58-59.  Body  pains,  mental  agony,  loss  of  wealth,  danger  from  the  king,  quarrels  with  the 
kinsmen  will  be  the  effects  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  the  Dasha  of  Surya.  If  Ketu  is 
associated  with  the  Lord  of  Lagn,  there  will  be  some  happiness  at  the  commencement,  distress 
in  the  middle  part  and  receipt  of  the  news  of  death  at  the  end  of  the  Antar  Dasha. 

60-61.  Diseases  of  teethe,  or  cheeks,  urinary  troubles,  loss  of  position,  loss  of  friends  and 
wealth,  death  of  father,  foreign  journey  and  troubles  from  enemies  will  be  the  results,  if  Ketu 
is  in  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

62-64.  Beneficial  effects,  like  happiness  from  wife  and  children,  satisfaction,  increase  of 
friends,  gain  of  clothes  etc.  and  renown  will  be  derived,  if  Ketu  is  in  Sahaj,  Ari,  Karm,  or 
Labh. 

If  Ketu  is  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati  (or  is  in  any  of  those  Bhavas),  there  will  be  danger  of 
premature  death.  The  remedial  measures  for  obtaining  relief  from  the  evil  effects  are 
recitation  of  Mantras  of  Goddess  Durga  (Shat  Chandi  Path)  and  giving  a  goat  in  charity. 

65-68.  Marriage  and  happiness,  as  desired  from  wife,  gain  of  property,  travels  to  other  places, 
meeting  with  Brahmins  and  the  king,  acquisition  of  kingdom,  riches,  magnanimity  and 
majesty,  auspicious  functions  at  the  home,  availability  of  sweet  preparations,  acquisition  of 
pearls  and  other  jewels,  clothes,  cattle,  wealth,  grains  and  conveyances,  enthusiasm,  good 
reputation  etc.  are  the  auspicious  effects  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  in  the  Dasha  of  Surya,  if 
Sukr  is  placed  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon,  or,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  in  his  own  Rasi, 
in  his  own  Varg,  or  in  a  friendly  Rasi. 

69-73.  Displeasure  of  the  king,  mental  agony  and  distress  to  wife  and  children  will  be  the 
effects  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  he  is  in  the  6l  ,  the  8*  ,  or  the  12l  from  the  Lord  of  the 
Dasha.  The  effects  of  the  Antar  Dasha  would  be  moderate  at  its  commencement,  good  during 
the  middle  portion  and  evil  effects,  like  disrepute,  loss  of  position,  inimical  relations  with 
kinsmen  and  loss  of  comforts,  will  be  derived  at  the  end.  If  Sukr  is  the  Lord  of  Yuvati  (and 
Dhan),  there  will  be  pains  in  the  body  and  the  possibility  of  suffering  from  diseases.  There 
will  be  premature  death,  if  Sukr  is  associated  with  Ari's,  or  Randhr's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measures  for  obtaining  relief  from  the  evil  effects  are  Mrityunjaya  Japa,  Rudra  Japa  and 
giving  in  charily  a  tawny  cow,  or  female  buffalo. 

Ch.  53.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Candr 

1-2V2.  Acquisition  of  horses,  elephants  and  clothes,  devotion  to  deities  and  preceptor, 
recitation  of  religious  songs  in  praise  of  God,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  extreme  happiness 
and  enjoyment  and  name  and  fame  will  be  the  beneficial  results  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr 
in  her  own  Dasha,  if  she  is  placed  in  her  exaltation  Rasi,  her  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a 
Trikon,  or  is  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Dharm,  or  Karm. 

3-6.  Loss  of  wealth,  loss  of  position,  lethargy,  agony,  antagonism  towards  the  king  and 
ministers,  distress  to  mother,  imprisonment  and  loss  of  kinsmen  will  be  the  evil  effects  in  her 
Antar  Dasha,  if  Candr  is  in  her  debilitation  Rasi,  if  Candr  is  associated  with  malefics,  or,  if 
Candr  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya.  If  Candr  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati,  or  is  associated 
with  Randhr's,  or  with  Vyaya' s  Lord,  there  will  be  pains  in  the  body  and  danger  of  premature 
death.  The  remedial  measures  are  giving  in  charity  of  a  tawny-coloured  cow,  or  female 
buffalo. 


7-8V2.  Advancement  of  fortune,  recognition  by  the  government,  gain  of  clothes  and 
ornaments,  success  in  all  efforts,  increase  in  agricultural  production  and  prosperity  at  home 
and  profits  in  business  will  be  the  favourable  effects  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the 
Dasha  of  Candr,  if  Mangal  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon.  Great  happiness  and  enjoyment  of 
comforts  will  be  derived,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  or  in  his  own  Rasi. 

9-12.  Distress  to  the  body,  losses  at  home  and  in  agricultural  production,  losses  in  business 
dealings,  antagonism,  or  adverse  relations  with  servants  (employees)  and  the  king,  separation 
from  kinsmen  and  hot  temperament  will  be  the  evil  effects  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if 
he  is  placed  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  from  Lagn,  be  associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti 
from  malefics  in  the  6* ,  the  8l  ,  or  the  12l  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

13-14.  There  will  be  some  auspicious  results  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of 
Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Candr,  but  later  there  will  be  danger  from  the  king,  thieves  and  snakes, 
distress  to  cattle,  loss  of  kinsmen  and  friends,  loss  of  reputation  and  mental  agony,  if  Rahu  is 
placed  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon. 

15-16.  Success  in  all  ventures,  gain  of  conveyances,  garments  etc.  from  the  king  etc.  in  the 
South-West  direction  will  be  derived,  if  Rahu  in  his  Antar  Dasha  receives  a  Drishti  from 
benefics,  if  Rahu  is  in  Sahaj,  Ari,  Karm,  or  Labh,  or,  if  Rahu  is  yuti  with  a  Yog  Karak  Grah. 

17-18.  Loss  of  position,  mental  agony,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  danger  of  diseases, 
danger  from  the  king,  scorpions  and  snakes  etc.  will  happen,  if  Rahu  is  weak  and  is  placed  in 
the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

19-21.  Pilgrimage  to  holy  places,  visits  to  sacred  shrines,  beneficence,  inclination  towards 
charitable  deeds  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Rahu  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  or  in  the  3rd,  or  the 
1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  There  will  be  body  troubles  (physical  afflictions),  if  Rahu  is 
in  Dhan,  or  in  Yuvati.  Rahu  Japa  and  giving  a  goat  in  charily  are  the  remedial  measures  for 
obtaining  relief  from  the  evil  effects  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu. 

22-24 XA.  Acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  auspicious  celebrations  at  home,  gains  of  clothes  and 
ornaments,  recognition  from  the  king  beneficence  of  the  Isht  Lord  (Isht  Devata),  gains  of 
wealth,  land,  conveyances,  success  in  all  ventures  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king  will  be  the 
beneficial  effects  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  the  Dasha  of  Candr,  if  Guru  is  placed  in  a 
Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon  to  Lagn,  or,  if  Guru  is  in  his  own,  or  in  his  exaltation  Rasi. 

25-281//2.  Destruction  of  preceptor  (and  father  etc.)  and  children,  loss  of  position,  mental 
agony,  quarrels,  destruction  of  a  house,  conveyances  and  agricultural  land  will  be  the  evil 
effects  in  his  Antar  Dasha,  if  Guru  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  if  Guru  is  combust,  in  his 
debilitation  Rasi,  or  be  associated  with  malefics.  Gains  of  cattle,  grains,  clothes  and  happiness 
from  brothers,  acquisition  of  property,  valour,  patience,  oblations,  celebrations,  like  marriage 
etc.,  gain  of  a  kingdom  etc.  will  be  the  favourable  effects,  if  Guru  is  in  3rd,  or  in  the  1 1th  from 
the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

29-3 1 .  Effects,  like  unpalatable  food,  journeys  to  places  away  from  the  homeland,  will  be 
derived,  if  Guru  is  weak  and  is  placed  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  Candr.  There  will  be 
good  effects  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha  and  distress  at  its  end.  There  will  be 
premature  death,  if  Guru  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Remedial  measures  for  obtaining  relief 
from  the  above  evil  effects  are  recitation  of  Shiva  Sahasranam  Japa  and  giving  gold  in  charity. 


32-34.  Effects,  like  birth  of  a  son,  friendship,  gain  of  wealth  and  property,  profits  in  business 
with  the  help  of  Sudras,  increase  in  agricultural  production,  gains  from  son,  riches  and  glory 
by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  will  be  experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of 
Candr,  if  Sani  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon  from  Lagn,  or,  if  Sani  is  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  his 
own  Navahs,  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  if  Sani  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  associated  with 
benefics,  or,  if  Sani  is  in  Labh  with  strength. 

35-35x/^.  Effects,  like  visits  to  holy  places,  bathing  in  holy  rivers  etc.,  the  creation  of  troubles 
by  many  people  and  distress  from  enemies,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani,  if  Sani 
is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  Vyaya,  or  Dhan,  or,  if  Sani  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi. 

36-38.  Effects,  like  enjoyments  and  gains  of  wealth  some  times,  while  opposition,  or  quarrels 
with  wife  and  children  at  other  times,  will  be  realized,  if  Sani  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon 
from  the  Lord  of  that  Dasha,  or  is  endowed  with  strength.  If  Sani  is  in  Dhan,  Yuvati,  or 
Randhr,  there  will  be  physical  distress.  The  remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  for  obtaining 
relief  from  the  evil  effects  are  Mrityunjaya  Japa,  giving  in  charity  a  black  cow,  or  female 
buffalo. 

39-41.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  wealth,  recognition  by  the  king,  gain  of  clothes  etc., 
discussions  on  Shastras  gain  of  knowledge  from  society  with  learned  and  holy  people, 
enjoyments,  birth  of  children,  satisfaction,  profits  in  business,  acquisition  of  conveyance  and 
ornaments  etc.  will  be  experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh  in  the  Dasha  of  Candr,  if  Budh 
is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon,  if  Budh  is  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  his  own  Navahs,  or  in  his 
exaltation  Rasi,  endowed  with  strength. 

42-43  Vi.  Effects,  like  marriage,  oblations  (Yagya),  charities,  performance  of  religious  rites, 
close  relations  with  the  king,  social  contacts  with  men  of  learning,  acquisition  of  pearls, 
corals,  Mani  (jewels),  conveyances,  clothes,  ornaments,  good  health,  affections,  enjoyments, 
drinking  of  Soma  Rasa  and  other  tasty  syrups  etc.  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh, 
if  he  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon,  or  in  the  1 1*  ,  or  in  the  2n  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

44-46.  Pains  in  the  body,  loss  in  agricultural  ventures,  imprisonment,  distress  to  wife  and 
children  will  be  the  inauspicious  effects,  if  Budh  be  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  the 
Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or  be  in  his  debilitation  Rasi.  If  Budh  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati,  there 
will  be  fear  of  fever.  The  remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  for  obtaining  relief  from  the  evil 
effects  are  recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam  and  giving  a  goat  in  charity. 

47-48.  Effects,  like  gain  of  wealth,  enjoyment,  happiness  to  wife  and  children,  religious 
inclination  etc.,  will  arise  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  the  Dasha  of  Candr,  if  Ketu  is  in  a 
Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  or  Sahaj  and  is  endowed  with  strength.  There  will  be  some  loss  of  wealth 
at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha.  Later  all  will  be  well. 

49-491/2.  Gain  of  wealth,  cattle  etc.  will  be  the  effects,  if  Ketu  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  the  9th,  the  5th, 
or  the  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  and  is  equipped  with  strength.  There  will  be  loss  of 
wealth  at  the  end  of  the  Antar  Dasha. 

50-52.  There  will  be  obstacles  in  ventures,  due  to  interference  by  enemies  and  quarrels,  if 
Ketu  be  in  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is 
associated  with  malefics.  If  Ketu  is  in  Dhan,  or  in  Yuvati,  there  will  be  danger  of  affliction  of 


the  body  with  diseases.  Mrityunjaya  Japa  will  give  relief  in  all  the  evil  effects  and  will  ensure 
gain  of  wealth  and  property  with  the  beneficence  of  Lord  Shiva. 

53-55.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  gaining  of  clothes,  ornaments,  cattle, 
conveyances  etc.,  happiness  to  wife  and  children,  construction  of  a  new  house,  availability  of 
sweet  preparations  every  day,  use  of  perfumes,  affairs  with  beautiful  women,  sound  health 
etc.  will  be  experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  in  the  Dasha  of  Candr,  if  Sukr  is  in  a 
Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  in  Labh,  Bandhu,  or  Dharm,  or  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  or  in  his  own  Rasi. 

56.  Physical  soundness,  good  reputation,  acquisition  of  more  land  and  houses,  will  result,  if 
Sukr  is  yuti  with  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

51-51V2.  There  will  be  loss  of  landed  property,  children,  wife  and  cattle  and  opposition  from 
government,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  combust,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is 
associated  with  malefics. 

58-60.  If  Sukr  is  in  Dhan  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  or  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  is  there,  associated  with 
the  Lord  of  Labh,  there  will  be  acquisition  of  an  underground  hidden  treasure,  gain  of  land, 
enjoyment,  birth  of  a  son  etc.  Advancement  of  good  fortune,  fulfillment  of  ambitions  with  the 
beneficence  of  the  king,  devotion  to  deities  and  Brahmins,  gain  of  jewels,  like  pearls  etc.  will 
result,  if  Sukr  is  yuti  with  Dharm' s,  or  Labh's  Lord. 

61.  Acquisition  of  more  house  property  and  agricultural  land  and  gain  of  wealth  and 
enjoyment  will  be  the  good  effects,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon  from  the  Lord  of  the 
Dasha. 

62.  Deportation  to  foreign  lands,  sorrows,  death  and  danger  from  thieves  and  snakes  will  be 
the  results,  if  Sukr  is  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

63-64.  There  will  be  danger  of  premature  death,  if  Sukr  be  the  Lord  of  the  2nd,  or  7th.  The 
remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  for  obtaining  relief  from  the  evil  effects  are  Rudra  Japa  and 
giving  in  charity  a  white  cow  and  silver. 

65-67.  Recovery  of  a  lost  kingdom  and  wealth,  happiness  in  the  family,  acquisition  of  villages 
and  land  with  the  kind  assistance  of  one's  friends  and  the  king,  birth  of  a  son,  beneficence  of 
Goddess  Lakshmi,  will  be  the  beneficial  results  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Dasha  of 
Candr,  if  Surya  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  Putr,  or  in  Dharm, 
or  in  Labh,  or  in  Dhan,  or  in  Sahaj .  At  the  end  of  the  Antar  Dasha  there  is  the  likelihood  of 
attacks  of  fever  and  lethargy. 

68-70.  Danger  from  the  government,  thieves  and  snakes,  affliction  with  fever  and  troubles  in 
foreign  journey  are  the  likely  results,  if  Surya  is  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 
If  Surya  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati,  there  will  be  sufferings  from  fever  in  his  Antar 
Dasha.  Worship  of  Lord  Shiva  is  the  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil 
effects. 

Ch.  54.  Effects  of  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal 

I-2V2.  Effects,  like  gains  of  wealth  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  beneficence  of  Goddess 
Lakshmi,  recovery  of  a  lost  kingdom  and  of  wealth,  birth  of  a  son,  will  arise  in  the  Antar 


Dasha  of  Mangal  in  his  own  Dasha,  if  he  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  Putr,  in  Dharm,  in  Labh,  in  Sahaj, 
or  in  Dhan,  or  be  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Lagn. 

3-4.  Fulfillment  of  ambitions  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king  and  acquisition  of  a  house,  land, 
cow,  buffalo  etc.  will  be  the  effects,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  his 
own  Navahs  and  is  endowed  with  strength. 

5-5V2.  Urinary  troubles,  wounds,  danger  from  snakes  and  the  king  will  be  the  results,  if 
Mangal  is  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or  is  associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  malefics. 

6-8.  There  will  be  mental  agony  and  body  pains,  if  Mangal  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan,  or  Yuvati. 
Lord  Shiva  will  give  relief  by  restoring  health  and  providing  gains  of  wealth  and  happiness,  if 
the  person  concerned  performs  Rudr  Japa  and  gives  a  red-coloured  bull  in  charity. 

9-IOV2.  Effects,  like  recognition  from  government,  gain  of  house,  land  etc.,  happiness  from 
son,  extraordinary  profits  in  business,  bathing  in  holy  rivers,  like  Ganges  and  foreign 
journeys,  will  be  the  auspicious  effects  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if 
Rahu  is  in  his  Multrikon,  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  in  Labh,  Putr,  or  Dharm  and  is 
associated  with  benefics. 

11-14.  Danger  from  snakes,  wounds,  destruction  of  cattle,  danger  from  animals,  diseases,  due 
to  imbalance  of  bile  and  wind,  imprisonment  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Rahu  is  in  Randhr,  or 
Vyaya,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from,  or  is  associated  with  malefics.  There  will  be  loss  of  wealth, 
if  Rahu  is  in  Dhan  and  great  danger  of  premature  death,  if  he  is  in  Yuvati.  The  remedial 
measure  to  be  adopted  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  Naga  Puja,  offering  food 
to  Brahmins  and  Mrityunjaya  Japa.  They  will  help  in  the  prolongation  of  longevity. 

15-16.  Effects,  like  good  reputation  and  renown,  honours  by  government,  increase  in  wealth 
and  grains,  happiness  at  home,  gain  of  property,  happiness  from  wife  and  children  etc.  will  be 
realized  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if  Guru  is  in  Dharm,  or  Putr,  in  a 
Kendr,  or  in  Labh,  or  in  Dhan,  or,  if  Guru  is  in  his  exalted,  or  own  Navahs. 

\l-\9V2.  Acquisition  of  a  house,  land,  well-being,  gain  of  property,  sound  health,  good 
reputation,  gains  of  cattle,  success  in  business,  happiness  to  wife  and  children,  reverence  from 
government,  gain  of  wealth  etc.  will  be  beneficial  effects,  if  Guru  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a  Trikon, 
or  in  the  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Guru  is  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Dharm, 
Karm,  or  Bandhu,  or  Lagn,  or,  if  Guru  is  in  a  benefic  Navahs  etc. 

20-22.  Danger  from  thieves,  snakes,  wrath  of  the  king,  bilious  diseases,  oppression  by  goblins 
(Prot),  loss  of  servants  and  co-borns,  will  be  evil  effects,  if  Guru  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  in 
Vyaya,  or,  if  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or,  if  Guru  is  associated  with,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  malefics,  or,  if  Guru  is  otherwise  weak.  There  will  be  suffering  from  fever,  or 
danger  of  premature  death,  if  Guru  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan.  The  remedial  measure  to  be  adopted 
to  combat  the  above  evil  effects  is  recitation  of  Shiva  Sahasranam. 

23-25.  Effects,  like  recognition  from  the  king,  increase  in  reputation,  gain  of  wealth  and 
grains,  happiness  from  children  and  grandchildren,  increase  in  the  number  of  cows  etc.  will  be 
experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if  Sani  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a 
Trikon,  in  his  Multrikon,  in  his  exalted,  or  his  own  Navahs,  or,  if  Sani  is  associated  with  the 


Lord  of  Lagn,  or,  if  Sani  is  associated  with  benefics.  Results  will  generally  fructify  on 
Saturdays  in  the  month  of  Sani. 

26-26!/2.  Danger  from  Yavana  kings  (foreign  dignitaries),  loss  of  wealth,  imprisonment, 
possibility  of  affliction  with  diseases,  loss  in  agricultural  production  will  result,  if  Sani  is  in 
his  debilitation  Rasi,  or  in  an  enemy  Rasi,  or,  if  Sani  is  in  Randhr,  or  in  Vyaya. 

27-291/2.  Effects,  like  great  danger,  loss  of  life,  wrath  of  king,  mental  agony,  danger  from 
thieves  and  fire,  punishment  by  the  king,  loss  of  co-borns,  dissensions  amongst  members  of 
the  family,  loss  of  cattle,  fear  of  death,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  imprisonment  etc.  will  be 
felt,  if  Sani  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord  and  is  associated  with  malefics. 

30-32.  There  will  be  journeys  to  foreign  lands,  loss  of  reputation,  violent  actions,  loss  from 
sale  of  agricultural  lands,  loss  of  position,  agony,  defeat  in  battle,  urinary  troubles  etc.,  if  Sani 
is  in  a  Kendr,  in  the  1  ll  ,  or  in  the  5l  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

33-35.  Effects,  like  death,  danger  from  the  king  and  thieves,  rheumatism,  pains,  danger  from 
the  enemy  and  members  of  the  family,  will  be  experienced,  if  Sani  is  in  the  8th,  or  the  12th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  and  is  associated  with  malefics.  There  will  be  relief  from  the  evil 
effects  by  the  beneficence  of  Lord  Shiva,  if  Mrityunjaya  is  performed  in  the  prescribed 
manner. 

36-371/2.  Effects,  like  association  with  pious  and  holy  persons,  performance  of  Ajaya  Japa, 
charities,  observance  of  religious  rites,  gain  of  reputation,  inclination  towards  diplomacy, 
availability  of  sweetish  preparations,  acquisition  of  conveyances,  clothes  and  cattle  etc., 
conferment  of  authority  in  the  king's  retinue,  success  in  agricultural  projects  etc.,  will  be 
experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh  in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a 
Trikon  from  Lagn. 

38-39.  Diseases  of  heart,  imprisonment,  loss  of  kinsmen,  distress  to  wife  and  children, 
destruction  of  wealth  and  cattle  etc.  will  result,  if  Budh  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  if  Budh  is 
combust,  or,  if  Budh  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya. 

40-401/2.  There  will  be  journeys  to  foreign  lands,  increase  in  the  number  of  enemies,  affliction 
with  many  kind  of  ailments,  antagonism  with  the  king,  quarrels  with  kinsmen  etc.,  if  Budh  be 
associated  with  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

41-431/2.  Fulfillment  of  all  ambitions,  gain  of  wealth  and  grains,  recognition  by  the  king, 
acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  gain  of  clothes  and  ornaments,  attachment  to  many  kind  of  musical 
instruments,  attainment  of  the  position  of  a  Commander  of  an  Army,  discussions  on  Shastras 
and  Puranas,  gain  of  riches  to  wife  and  children  and  beneficence  of  Goddess  Lakshmi  will  be 
the  very  auspicious  results,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if 
Budh  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi. 

44-45 lA.  Effects,  like  defamation,  sinful  thinking,  harsh  speech,  danger  from  thieves,  fire  and 
the  king,  quarrels  without  reason,  fear  of  attacks  by  thieves  and  dacoits  (armed  robber  bands) 
during  travels,  will  be  derived,  if  Budh  is  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  Mangal,  or  is 
associated  with  malefics. 


46-47.  There  will  be  a  possibility  of  critical  illness  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  he  is 
Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  these  evil  effects  are 
recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam  and  giving  a  horse  in  charity. 

48-491//2.  Beneficence  of  the  king,  gain  of  wealth,  little  gains  of  land  at  the  commencement  of 
the  Dasha  and  substantial  later,  birth  of  a  son,  conferment  of  authority  by  government,  gain  of 
cattle  etc.  will  be  the  results  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if  Ketu  is  in  a 
Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  in  Sahaj,  or  Labh,  or,  if  Ketu  is  associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from 
benefics. 

50-5 IV2.  Birth  of  a  son,  increase  in  reputation,  beneficence  of  Goddess  Lakshmi,  gains  of 
wealth  from  employees,  attainment  of  the  position  of  a  Commander  of  an  Army,  friendship 
with  the  king,  performance  of  oblations,  gains  of  clothes  and  ornaments  etc.  will  be  the 
beneficial  effects,  if  Ketu  is  a  Yog  Karak  and  is  endowed  with  strength.  (Ketu  assumes  the 
role  of  a  Yog  Karak,  if  he  is  yuti  with  a  Yog  Karak  Grah  (Lord  of  a  Kendr  and  a  Trikon)). 

52-54.  Effects,  like  quarrels,  tooth  trouble,  distress  from  thieves  and  tigers,  fever,  dysentery, 
leprosy  and  distress  to  wife  and  children  etc.  will  be  experienced,  if  Ketu  is  in  the  6th,  the  8th, 
or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  If  Ketu  is  in  Dhan,  or  in  Yuvati,  there  will  be  diseases, 
disgrace,  agony  and  loss  of  wealth. 

55-56V2.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  great  enjoyment  and  comfort  of  luxuries,  gain 
of  elephants,  horses,  clothes  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  in  the  Dasha  of 
Mangal,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr  to  Lagn,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  exaltation,  or  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if 
Sukr  is  Lagn's,  Putr's,  or  Dharm's  Lord.  If  Sukr  is  related  to  Lagn's  Lord,  there  will  be 
happiness  to  wife  and  children,  opulence  and  glory  and  increased  good  fortune. 

57-60.  Gain  of  property,  celebrations  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  gain  of  wealth  from  the  employer, 
acquisition  of  a  house,  land,  villages  etc.  by  the  beneficence  of  the  sovereign,  will  be  the 
results,  if  Sukr  is  in  the  5th,  the  9th,  the  1 1th,  or  the  2nd  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  In  the  last 
part  of  the  Dasha  there  will  be  functions  of  songs  and  dances  and  bathing  in  holy  water.  If 
Sukr  is  connected  with,  or  related  to  the  Lord  of  Karm,  there  will  be  construction  of  wells, 
reservoirs  etc.  and  performance  of  religious,  charitable  and  pious  deeds. 

61-62.  There  will  be  sorrows,  physical  distress,  loss  of  wealth,  danger  from  thieves  and  the 
king,  dissensions  in  the  family,  distress  to  wife  and  children  and  destruction  of  cattle,  if  Sukr 
be  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or  be  associated  with  malefics. 

63.  If  Sukr  be  the  Lord  of  the  2nd,  or  the  7th,  there  will  be  pains  in  the  body  in  his  Antar  Dasha. 
For  regaining  good  health  the  remedial  measure  to  be  adopted  is  giving  a  cow,  or  female 
buffalo  in  charity. 

64-66.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  conveyances,  gain  of  reputation,  birth  of  a  son,  growth  of 
wealth,  amicable  atmosphere  in  the  family,  sound  health,  potency,  recognition  by  the  the  king, 
extraordinary  profits  in  business  and  audience  with  the  king  etc.  will  be  experienced  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if  Surya  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi, 
or,  if  Surya  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  or  in  Labh  along  with  Karm's  Lord  and  with  Labh's 
Lord. 


6I-6IV2.  Distress  to  the  body,  agony,  failure  in  ventures,  possibilities  of  suffering  from 
troubles  in  the  forehead,  fever,  dysentery  etc.  will  be  the  effects,  if  Surya  is  in  the  6th,  the  8th, 
or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Surya  is  associated  with  malefics. 


68-69.  There  will  be  attacks  of  fever,  danger  from  snakes  and  poison  and  distress  to  son,  if 
Surya  be  the  Lord  of  the  2nd,  or  the  7th.  The  remedial  mea 
is  to  perform  worship  of  Surya  in  the  prescribed  manner. 


Surya  be  the  Lord  of  the  2nd,  or  the  7th.  The  remedial  measure  to  gain  good  health  and  wealth 


70-73.  Acquisition  of  more  kingdom,  gain  of  perfumes,  clothes,  construction  of  reservoirs, 
shelters  for  cows  etc.,  celebrations  of  auspicious  functions,  like  marriage  etc.,  happiness  to 
wife  and  children,  good  relations  with  parents,  acquisition  of  property  by  the  beneficence  of 
the  sovereign,  success  in  the  desired  projects  will  be  the  effects  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr 
in  the  Dasha  of  Mangal,  if  Candr  is  in  her  exaltation  Rasi,  or  in  her  own  Rasi,  or  in  a  Kendr, 
or  in  Dharm,  or  in  Bandhu,  or  in  Karm,  or  in  Lagn  along  with  the  Lords  of  those  Bhavas.  The 
good  effects  will  be  realized  in  full,  if  Candr  is  waxing.  Waning  Candr  will  reduce  the  impact 
of  the  effects  to  some  extent. 

74-76.  The  effects,  like  death,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  loss  of  lands,  wealth  and  cattle 
and  danger  of  a  war  etc.  will  be  experienced,  if  Candr  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or,  if  Candr  is 
in  his  enemy  Rasi,  or,  if  Candr  is  in  Ari,  in  Randhr,  or  in  Vyaya  from  Lagn,  or  from  the  Lord 
of  the  Dasha.  There  will  be  the  possibility  of  premature  death,  distress  to  the  body  and  mental 
agony,  if  Candr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  to  obtain 
relief  from  the  above  evil  effects,  are  recitation  of  Mantras  of  the  Goddess  Durga  and  the 
Goddess  Lakshmi. 

Ch.  55.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu 

1-4.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  enthusiasm,  cordial  relations  with  the  king, 
happiness  from  wife  and  children  and  increase  in  property,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha 
of  Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu,  if  Rahu  is  in  Kark,  Vrischik,  Kanya,  or  Dhanu  and  is  in  Sahaj, 
Ari,  Karm,  or  Labh,  or  is  yuti  with  a  Yog  Karak  Grah  in  his  exaltation  Rasi. 

5-6.  There  will  be  danger  from  thieves,  distress  from  wounds,  antagonism  with  government 
officials,  destruction  of  kinsmen,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  if  Rahu  is  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya, 
or  be  associated  with  malefics. 

7.  If  Rahu  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord,  or  is  in  Dhan,  or  Yuvati,  there  will  be  distress  and 
diseases.  To  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  Rahu  should  be  worshipped  (by 
recitation  of  his  Mantras)  and  by  giving  in  charily  things,  connected  with,  or  ruled  by  Rahu. 

8-12V2.  Effects,  like  gain  of  position,  patience,  destruction  of  foes,  enjoyment,  cordial 
relations  with  the  king,  regular  increase  in  wealth  and  property,  like  the  growth  of  Candr  of 
the  bright  half  of  the  month  (Shukla  Paksh),  gain  of  conveyance  and  cows,  audience  with  the 
king  by  performing  journey  to  the  West,  or  South-East,  success  in  the  desired  ventures,  return 
to  one's  homeland,  doing  good  for  Brahmins,  visit  to  holy  places,  gain  of  a  village,  devotion 
to  deities  and  Brahmins,  happiness  from  wife,  children  and  grand  children,  availability  of 
sweetish  preparations  daily  etc.  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  the  Dasha  of 
Rahu,  if  Guru  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  his  own  Navahs,  or  in  his  exalted 
Navahs,  or,  if  Guru  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon  with  reference  to  Lagn. 


13-14V2.  Loss  of  wealth,  obstacles  in  work,  defamation,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  heart 
disease,  entrustment  of  governmental  authority  etc.  will  result,  if  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation 
Rasi,  is  combust,  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  is  in  an  enemy  Rasi,  or  is  associated  with 
malefics. 

15-17.  There  will  be  gains  of  land,  good  food,  gains  of  cattle  etc.,  inclinations  towards 
charitable  and  religious  work  etc.,  if  Guru  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  the  1 1th,  the  2nd,  or  the 
3rd  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  and  is  endowed  with  strength. 

18-20.  Loss  of  wealth  and  distress  to  body  will  result,  if  Guru  is  in  the  6th,  the  8th,  or  the  12th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Guru  is  associated  with  malefics.  There  will  be  danger  of 
premature  death,  if  Guru  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  person  will  get  relief  from  the 
above  evil  effects  and  enjoy  good  health  by  the  beneficence  of  the  Lord  Shiva,  if  he  worships 
his  idol,  made  of  gold. 

21-24.  Effects,  like  pleasure  of  the  king  for  devotion  in  his  service,  auspicious  functions,  like 
celebration  of  marriage  etc.  at  home,  construction  of  a  garden,  reservoir  etc.,  gain  of  wealth 
and  cattle  from  well-to-do  persons,  belonging  to  the  Sudra  class,  loss  of  wealth  caused  by  the 
king  during  journey  to  the  West,  reduction  in  income,  due  to  lethargy,  return  to  homeland, 
will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu,  if  Sani  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a 
Trikon,  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  his  Multrikon,  in  Sahaj,  or  in  Labh. 

25-26.  Danger  from  menials,  the  king  and  enemies,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  distress  to 
kinsmen,  disputes  with  the  coparceners,  disputes  in  dealings  with  others,  but  sudden  gain  of 
ornaments,  will  result,  if  Sani  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  in  his  enemy's  Rasi,  or  in  Randhr,  or 
Vyaya. 

27-29.  There  will  be  heart  disease,  defamation,  quarrels,  danger  from  enemies,  foreign 
journeys,  affliction  with  Gulma,  unpalatable  food  and  sorrows  etc.,  if  Sani  is  in  the  6th,  the  8th, 
or  the  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  Premature  death  is  likely,  if  Sani  is  Dhan's,  or 
Yuvati's  Lord.  Remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  regain 
good  health  is  giving  a  black  cow,  or  a  she-buffalo  in  charity. 

30-33.  Auspicious  effects,  like  Raj  Yog,  well  being  in  the  family,  profits  and  gain  of  wealth  in 
business,  comforts  of  conveyances,  marriage  and  other  auspicious  functions,  increase  in  the 
number  of  cattle,  gain  of  perfumes,  comforts  of  bed,  women  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar 
Dasha  of  Budh  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu,  if  Budh  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  Putr 
and,  if  Budh  is  endowed  with  strength.  Good  results,  like  Raj  Yog,  beneficence  of  the  king 
and  gain  of  wealth  and  reputation,  will  be  realized  particularly  on  Wednesday  in  the  month  of 
Budh. 

34-35.  Sound  health,  Isht  Siddhi,  attending  discourse  on  Puranas  and  ancient  history, 
marriage,  offering  of  oblations,  charities,  religious  inclination  and  sympathetic  attitude 
towards  others  will  result,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  the  1 1th,  3rd,  9th,  or  10th  from  the  Lord  of 
the  Dasha. 

36-38.  There  will  be  opprobrium  (Ninda)  of  deities  and  Brahmins  by  the  native,  loss  of 
fortune,  speaking  lies,  unwise  actions,  fear  from  snakes,  thieves  and  the  government,  quarrels, 
distress  to  wife  and  children  etc.,  if  Budh  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Budh  receives  a 
Drishti  from  Sani. 


39.  If  Budh  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord,  there  will  be  fear  of  premature  death.  Remedial 
measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam. 

40-41.  During  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu  there  will  be  journeys  to  foreign 
countries,  danger  from  the  king,  rheumatic  fever  etc.  and  loss  of  cattle.  If  Ketu  is  yuti  with 
Randhr's  Lord,  there  will  be  distress  to  the  body  and  mental  tension.  Enjoyment,  gain  of 
wealth,  recognition  by  the  king,  acquisition  of  gold  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Ketu  is 
associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics. 

42-421//2.  There  will  be  Isht  Siddhi,  if  Ketu  is  related  to  the  Lord  of  Lagn.  If  he  is  associated 
with  the  Lord  of  Lagn,  there  will  definitely  be  gain  of  wealth.  There  will  also  definitely  be 
increase  in  the  number  of  cattle,  if  Ketu  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon. 

43-45.  Effects,  like  danger  from  thieves  and  snakes,  distress  from  wounds,  separation  from 
parents,  antagonistic  relations  with  kinsmen,  mental  agony  etc.  will  be  derived,  if  Ketu  is 
without  strength  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya.  If  Ketu  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord,  there  will  be 
distress  to  the  body.  The  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is 
giving  a  goat  in  charity. 

46-471//2.  Effects,  like  gains  of  wealth  through  Brahmins,  increase  in  the  number  of  cattle, 
celebrations  for  the  birth  of  a  son,  well-being,  recognition  from  government,  acquisition  of  a 
kingdom,  attainment  of  a  high  position  in  government,  great  enjoyment  and  comforts  etc.  will 
be  experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu,  if  Sukr  is  with  strength  in  a 
Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  or  in  Labh. 

48-501//2.  Construction  of  a  new  house,  availability  of  sweet  preparations,  happiness  from  wife 
and  children,  association  with  friends,  giving  of  grains  etc.  in  charity,  beneficence  of  the  king, 
gain  of  conveyances  and  clothes,  extraordinary  profits  in  business,  celebration  of  Upasayan 
ceremony  of  wearing  the  sacred  thread  (Janou)  etc.  will  be  the  auspicious  results,  if  Sukr  be  in 
his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  is  exalted,  or  in  his  own  Navahs. 

Sl-SS1/^.  There  will  be  diseases,  quarrels,  separation  from  one's  son,  or  father,  distress  to 
kinsmen,  disputes  with  coparceners,  danger  of  death  to  oneself,  or  to  one's  employer, 
unhappiness  to  wife  and  children,  pain  in  the  stomach  etc.,  if  Sukr  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or 
Vyaya,  in  his  debilitation,  or  in  an  enemy's  Rasi,  or,  if  Sukr  is  associated  with  Sani,  Mangal, 
or  Rahu. 


54-551/2,  Enjoyments  from  perfumes,  bed,  music  etc.,  gain  of  a  desired  object,  fulfillment  of 
desires  will  be  the  i 
Lord  of  the  Dasha. 


desires  will  be  the  results,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  in  the  1 1th,  or  in  the  10th  from  the 


56-59.  Effects,  like  danger  from  the  wrath  of  Brahmins,  snakes  and  the  king,  possibility  of 
affliction  with  diseases,  like  stoppage  of  urine,  diabetes,  pollution  of  blood,  anaemia, 
availability  of  only  coarse  food,  nervous  disorder,  imprisonment,  loss  of  wealth,  as  a  result  of 
penalties,  or  fines,  imposed  by  government,  will  be  derived,  if  Sukr  is  associated  with 
malefics  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  There  will  be  distress  to  wife  and 
children,  danger  of  premature  death  to  oneself,  if  Sukr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Remedial 
measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  worship  of  Goddess  Durga  and 
Goddess  Lakshmi. 


60-6  VA.  Effects,  like  cordial  relations  with  the  king,  increase  in  wealth  and  grains,  some 
popularity/respect,  some  possibility  of  becoming  head  of  a  village  etc.,  will  be  experienced  in 
the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu,  if  Surya  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi, 
in  Labh,  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon,  or  in  his  exalted,  or  own  Navahs. 

62-63 V2.  There  will  be  good  reputation  and  encouragement  and  assistance  by  government, 
journeys  to  foreign  countries,  acquisition  of  the  sovereignly  of  the  country,  gains  of  elephants, 
horses,  clothes,  ornaments,  fulfillment  of  ambitions,  happiness  to  children  etc.,  if  Surya  is 
associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  Lagn's,  Dhan's,  or  Karm's  Lord. 

64-65.  Fevers,  dysentery,  other  diseases,  quarrels,  antagonism  with  the  king,  travels,  danger 
from  foes,  thieves,  fire  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Surya  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or,  if  Surya 
is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

66.  Well-being  in  every  way  and  recognition  from  kings  in  foreign  countries  will  be  the 
results,  if  Surya  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  in  the  3rd,  or  in  the  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

67.  There  will  be  danger  of  critical  illness,  if  Surya  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Worship  of 
Surya  is  the  remedial  measure,  recommended  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects. 

68-70.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  respect  from  the  king,  gains  of  wealth,  sound 
health,  gains  of  garments  and  ornaments,  happiness  from  children,  comforts  of  conveyances, 
increase  in  house  and  landed  property  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr  in  the 
Dasha  of  Rahu,  if  Candr  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Labh, 
or,  if  Candr  is  in  a  friendly  Rasi,  receiving  a  Drishti  from  benefics. 

71-72.  Beneficence  of  the  Goddess  Lakshmi,  all-round  success,  increase  in  wealth  and  grains, 
good  reputation  and  worship  of  deities  will  be  the  results,  if  Candr  is  in  the  5th,  9th,  in  a  Kendr, 
or  in  the  1  ll  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

73-75.  There  will  be  the  creation  of  disturbances  at  home  and  in  the  agricultural  activities  by 
evil  spirits,  leopards  and  other  wild  animals,  danger  from  thieves  during  journeys  and  stomach 
disorders,  if  Candr  is  bereft  of  strength  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 
There  will  the  possibility  of  premature  death,  if  Candr  is  Dhan's,  or  Vyaya's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  to  give  in  charity  a  white  cow, 
or  a  female  buffalo. 

I6-IIV2.  Effects,  like  the  recovery  of  a  lost  kingdom  and  recovery  of  lost  wealth,  property  at 
home  and  increase  in  agricultural  production,  gain  of  wealth,  blessings  by  the  household  deity 
(Isht  Dev),  happiness  from  children,  enjoyment  of  good  food  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar 
Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the  Dasha  of  Rahu,  if  Mangal  is  in  Labh,  Putr,  or  Dharm,  or,  if  Mangal  is 
in  a  Kendr,  if  Mangal  receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics,  or,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation,  or  in 
his  own  Rasi. 

78-791//2.  There  will  be  acquisition  of  red-coloured  garments,  journeys,  audience  with  the  king, 
well-being  of  children  and  employer,  attainment  of  the  position  of  a  Commander  of  the  Army, 
enthusiasm  and  gain  of  wealth  through  kinsmen,  if  Mangal  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  the  5th,  9th,  3rd,  or 
in  the  1  ll  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 


80-82.  Distress  to  wife,  children  and  co-borns,  loss  of  position,  antagonistic  relations  with 
children,  wife  and  other  close  relations,  danger  from  thieves,  wounds  and  pain  in  the  body  etc. 
will  result,  if  Mangal  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  receiving  a  Drishti 
from  malefics. 

83.  There  will  be  lethargy  and  danger  of  death,  if  Mangal  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  giving  a  cow,  or  a  bull  in 
charity. 

Ch.  56.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Guru 

1-3  VI  Effects,  like  sovereignly  over  many  kings,  very  well  endowed  with  riches,  revered  by 
the  king,  gains  of  cattle,  clothes,  ornaments,  conveyances,  construction  of  a  new  house  and  a 
decent  mansion,  opulence  and  glory,  dawn  of  fortune,  success  in  ventures,  meetings  with 
Brahmins  and  the  king,  extraordinary  profits  from  the  employer  and  happiness  to  wife  and 
children,  will  be  experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  his  own  Dasha,  if  Guru  is  in  his 
exaltation  Rasi,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon. 

4-51/2.  Association  with  the  menials,  great  distress,  slander  by  coparceners,  wrath  of  the 
employer,  danger  of  premature  death,  separation  from  wife  and  children  and  loss  of  wealth 
and  grains  will  be  the  results,  if  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  in  his  debilitated  Navahs,  or 
in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya. 

6-7.  There  will  be  pains  in  the  body,  if  Guru  is  the  Lord  of  Yuvati  (or  of  Dhan).  The  remedial 
measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  get  fulfillment  of  ambitions  is 
recitation  of  Rudr  Japa  and  Shiva  Sahasranam. 

8-1 IV2.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  gain  of  clothes,  ornaments,  wealth,  grains, 
conveyances,  cattle  and  position,  happiness  from  son  and  friends  etc.,  gains  specially  of  a 
blue-coloured  horse,  journey  to  the  West,  audience  with  the  king  and  receipt  of  wealth  from 
him,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of  Guru,  if  Sani  is  in  his 
exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon  endowed  with  strength. 

12-14.  Loss  of  wealth,  affliction  with  fever,  mental  agony,  infliction  of  wounds  to  wife  and 
children,  inauspicious  events  at  home,  loss  of  cattle  and  employment,  antagonism  with 
kinsmen  etc.  will  be  results,  if  Sani  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  if  Sani  is  combust,  or,  if  Sani 
is  in  an  enemy's  Rasi. 


15-15x/2.  There  will  be  gain  of  land,  house,  son  and  cattle,  acquisition  of  riches  and  property 

througl 

Dasha. 


through  the  enemy  etc.,  if  Sani  is  in  Kendr,  Trikon,  the  1 1*  ,  or  in  the  2n  from  the  Lord  of  the 


16-17.  Effects,  like  loss  of  wealth,  antagonistic  relations  with  kinsmen,  obstacles  in  industrial 
ventures,  pains  in  the  body,  danger  from  the  members  of  the  family  etc.  will  be  realized,  if 
Sani  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Sani  is  associated  with  a 
malefic. 

18-19.  There  will  be  fear  of  premature  death,  if  Sani  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  these  evil  effects  and  to  enjoy  sound  health  are 
recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam  and  giving  in  charity  a  black  cow,  or  a  female  buffalo. 


20-2  VA.  Effects,  like  gains  of  wealth,  bodily  felicity,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  gain  of 
conveyances,  clothes  and  cattle  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh  in  the  Dasha 
of  Guru,  if  Budh  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  Kendr,  in  Trikon,  or,  if  Budh  is 
associated  with  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

22-221//2.  There  will  be  increase  in  the  number  of  enemies,  loss  of  enjoyment  and  comforts, 
loss  in  business,  affliction  with  fever  and  dysentery,  if  Budh  receives  a  Drishti  from  Mangal. 


23-24  Gains  of  wealth  in  his  own  country,  happiness  from  parents  and  acquisition  of 
conveyances  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king  will  result,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  the  5( 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Budh  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi. 


25-26.  There  will  be  loss  of  wealth,  journeys  to  foreign  countries,  danger  from  thieves  while 
traveling,  wounds,  burning  sensations,  eye  troubles,  wanderings  in  foreign  lands,  if  Budh  is  in 
the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Budh  is  associated  with  a  malefic  without 
receiving  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic. 

27-28.  Distress  without  reason,  anger,  loss  of  cattle,  loss  in  business,  fear  of  premature  death 
etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Budh  be  associated  with  a  malefic,  or  malefics  in  Ari,  in  Randhr,  or 
in  Vyaya. 

29-291//2.  There  will  be  enjoyment,  gains  of  wealth,  conveyances  and  clothes  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  even  if  Budh  is  associated  with  a  malefic,  but  receives  a 
Drishti  from  a  benefic.  At  the  end  of  the  Dasha,  however,  there  will  be  loss  of  wealth  and 
bodily  distress. 

30-31.  Premature  death  may  be  expected,  if  Budh  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  most 
effective  and  beneficial  remedial  measure  for  prolongation  of  longevity  and  to  obtain  relief 
from  other  evil  effects  is  recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam. 

32-321//2.  Moderate  enjoyment,  moderate  gain  of  wealth,  coarse  food,  or  food,  given  by  others, 
food,  given  at  the  time  of  death  ceremonies  and  acquisition  of  wealth  through  undesirable 
means  will  be  the  results,  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  the  Dasha  of  Guru,  if  Ketu  is 
associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic. 

33-34.  Effects,  like  loss  of  wealth  by  the  wrath  of  the  king,  imprisonment,  diseases,  loss  of 
physical  strength,  antagonism  with  father  and  brother  and  mental  agony,  will  be  experienced, 
if  Ketu  be  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or  be  associated  with  malefics. 

1>S-1>6V2.  Acquisition  of  a  palanquin,  elephants  etc.,  beneficence  of  the  king,  success  in  the 
desired  spheres,  profits  in  business,  increase  in  the  number  of  cattle,  gain  of  wealth,  clothes 
etc.  from  a  Yavana  king  (Muslim  dignitary)  will  be  the  auspicious  effects,  if  Ketu  is  in  the  5th, 
9th,  4th,  or  1 0th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

37-38.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Ketu  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord  (or,  if  Ketu  is  in 
Dhan,  or  in  Yuvati.  The  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is 
performance  of  Mrityunjaya  Japa  in  the  prescribed  manner. 

39-43.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  conveyances,  like  palanquin,  elephants  etc.,  gain  of  wealth 
by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  enjoyment,  gain  of  blue  and  red  articles,  extraordinary  income 


from  journeys  to  the  East,  well-being  in  the  family,  happiness  from  parents,  devotion  to 
deities,  construction  of  reservoirs,  charities  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if 
Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  or,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  own  Rasi  and  receives  a  Drishti 
from  a  benefic,  or  from  benefics. 


44-441//2.  Evil  effects,  like  quarrels,  antagonism  with  kinsmen,  distress  to  wife  and  children, 
will  be  felt,  if  Sukr  is  ir 
in  his  debilitation  Rasi. 


will  be  felt,  if  Sukr  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or  Lagn,  or,  if  Sukr  is 


There  will  be  quarrels,  danger  from  the  king,  antagonism  with  the  wife,  disputes  with  the 
father-in-law  and  with  brothers,  loss  of  wealth  etc.,  if  Sukr  is  associated  with  Sani,  or  Rahu,  or 
with  both. 

45-471//2.  There  will  be  gain  of  wealth,  happiness  from  wife,  meeting  with  the  king,  increase  in 
the  number  of  children,  conveyances  and  cattle,  enjoyment  of  music,  society  with  men  of 
learning,  availability  of  sweetish  preparations,  giving  help  and  assistance  to  kinsmen  etc.,  if 
Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  the  2n  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

48-50.  Loss  of  wealth,  fear  of  premature  death,  antagonism  with  wife  etc.  will  be  experienced, 
if  Sukr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  these  evil 
effects  is  giving  a  tawny-coloured  cow,  or  a  female  buffalo  in  charity. 

51-53.  Gain  of  wealth,  reverence,  happiness  and  acquisition  of  conveyances,  clothes, 
ornaments  etc.,  birth  of  children,  cordial  relations  with  the  king,  success  in  ventures  etc.  will 
be  the  auspicious  results  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Dasha  of  Guru,  if  Surya  is  in  his 
exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Sahaj,  Labh,  or  Dhan  and  be  endowed 
with  strength. 

54-551//2.  Effects,  like  nervous  disorder,  fever,  laziness,  or  reluctance  in  the  performance  of 
good  deeds,  indulgence  in  sins,  antagonistic  attitude  towards  all,  separation  from  kinsmen  and 
distress  without  reasons,  will  be  experienced,  if  Surya  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Surya 
is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

56-57.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Surya  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  enjoy  good  health  is  recitation  of 
Adhitya  Hridaya  Path. 

SS^O1,^.  Effects,  like  reverence  from  the  king,  opulence  and  glory,  happiness  from  wife  and 
children,  availability  of  good  food,  gain  of  reputation  by  performance  of  good  deeds,  increase 
in  the  number  of  children  and  grandchildren,  comforts  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king, 
religious  and  charitable  inclinations  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr  in  the 
Dasha  of  Guru,  if  Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  or,  if  Candr  is  in  her  exaltation,  or 
in  her  own  Rasi  and,  if  Candr  is  full  and  strong  and  in  an  auspicious  Bhava  from  the  Lord  of 
the  Dasha. 

61-63.  There  will  be  loss  of  wealth  and  kinsmen,  wanderings  in  foreign  lands,  danger  from 
the  king,  thieves,  quarrels  with  coparceners,  separation  from  a  maternal  uncle,  distress  to 
mother  etc.,  if  Candr  is  weak,  or  is  associated  with  malefics,  or,  if  Candr  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or 
Vyaya,  or,  if  Candr  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 


64.  Physical  distress  will  be  experienced,  if  Candr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  effects  is  Durga  Saptashati  Path. 

65-66.  Effects,  like  the  celebration  of  functions,  such  as  marriage  etc.,  gain  of  land,  or 
villages,  growth  of  strength  and  valour  and  success  in  all  ventures,  will  be  derived  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the  Dasha  of  Guru,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi, 
or  in  his  exalted,  or  own  Navahs. 

67-68.  There  will  be  gain  of  wealth  and  grains,  availability  of  good  sweetish  preparations, 
pleasure  of  the  king,  happiness  from  wife  and  children  and  other  auspicious  effects,  if  Mangal 
is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  in  Labh,  or  Dhan  and  is  associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from 
benefics. 

69-71.  Loss  of  wealth  and  house,  eye  trouble  and  other  inauspicious  effects  will  be  the  results, 
if  Mangal  is  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  debilitation 
Rasi,  associated  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  malefics.  The  effects  will  be  particularly 
adverse  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha.  There  will  be  some  mitigation  of  evil 
effects  later.  There  will  be  physical  distress  and  mental  agony,  if  Mangal  is  the  Lord  of  Dhan, 
or  Yuvati.  The  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  get  gains 
of  wealth  and  property  is  to  give  a  bull  in  charity. 

72-75.  Effects,  like  attachment  to  Yog,  gain  of  wealth  and  grains  during  the  first  five  months, 
sovereignly  over  a  village,  or  country,  meeting  with  a  foreign  king,  well-being  in  the  family, 
journeys  to  distant  lands,  bathing  in  holy  places,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu  in 
the  Dasha  of  Guru,  if  Rahu  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  his  Multrikon,  or,  if  Rahu 
is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or,  if  Rahu  receives  a  Drishti  from  the  Lord  of  a  Kendr,  or,  if  Rahu  is 
associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic. 

76-78.  Danger  from  thieves,  snakes,  the  king,  wounds,  troubles  in  domestic  affairs, 
antagonism  with  co-borns  and  coparceners,  bad  dreams,  quarrels  without  reason,  danger  from 
diseases  etc.  will  result,  if  Rahu  is  associated  with  a  malefic,  if  Rahu  is  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from 
the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

79-80.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Rahu  is  in  Dhan,  or  in  Yuvati.  The  remedial 
measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  Mrityunjaya  Japa  and  giving  a  goat  in 
charity. 

Ch.  57.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani 

1-3.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  happiness  from  wife  and  children,  acquisition  of 
conveyances,  like  elephants,  gain  of  clothes,  attainment  of  the  position  of  a  Commander  of  the 
Army  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  acquisition  of  cattle,  villages  and  land  etc.,  will  be 
derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if  Sani  is  in  his  own,  in  his  exaltation 
Rasi,  or  in  deep  exaltation,  or,  if  Sani  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or,  if  Sani  is  a  Yog  Karak. 

4-5 Vi.  Fear,  or  danger  from  the  king,  getting  inflicted  with  injuries  with  some  weapon, 
bleeding  gums,  dysentery  etc.  will  be  the  evil  effects  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha,  if 
Sani  is  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Sani  is  associated  with  malefics  in  his  debilitation  Rasi. 
There  will  be  danger  from  thieves  etc.,  going  away  from  the  homeland,  mental  agony  etc.  in 
the  middle  portion  of  the  Dasha.  The  last  part  of  the  Dasha  will  yield  beneficial  results. 


6-7.  There  will  be  danger  of  premature  death,  if  Sani  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Lord  Shiva 
will  afford  protection  and  render  relief,  if  Mrityunjaya  Japa  is  performed  in  the  prescribed 
manner. 

8-11.  Effects,  like  reverence  from  the  people,  good  reputation,  gain  of  wealth,  comforts  of 
conveyances  etc.,  inclination  towards  performance  of  religious  sacrifices  (Yagyas),  Raj  Yog, 
bodily  felicity,  enthusiasm,  well-being  in  the  family,  pilgrimage  to  holy  places,  performance 
of  religious  rites,  listening  to  Puranas,  charities,  availability  of  sweetish  preparations  etc.,  will 
be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon. 

\2-WA.  Acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  gain  of  wealth,  headship  of  a  village  will  be  the  effects  at 
the  commencement  of  the  Dasha,  if  Budh  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  from  Lagn,  or  from  the 
Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Budh  is  associated  with  Surya,  Mangal  and  Rahu.  Affliction  with 
diseases,  failure  in  all  ventures,  anxiety  and  feeling  of  danger  etc.  will  be  experienced  in  the 
middle  portion  and  in  the  last  part  of  the  Dasha. 

14-15.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Budh  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  regain  enjoyment  in  life  are 
recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam  and  giving  grains  in  charily. 

16-18.  Evil  effects,  like  loss  of  position,  dangers,  poverty,  distress,  foreign  journeys  etc.,  will 
be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  even  if  Ketu  is  in  his  exaltation, 
in  his  own,  in  a  benefic  Rasi,  or  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or,  if  Ketu  is  associated  with,  or 
receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics.  If  Ketu  is  related  to  the  Lagn's  Lord,  there  will  be  gain  of 
wealth  and  enjoyment  and  bathing  in  holy  places  and  visit  to  a  sacred  shrine  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha. 

19-19V2.  Gain  of  physical  strength  and  courage,  religious  thoughts,  audience  with  the  king 
(high  dignitaries  of  government,  like  president,  prime  minister,  governor,  ministers)  and  all 
kinds  of  enjoyments  will  be  experienced,  if  Ketu  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  a  Trikon,  in  the  3rd,  or  1 1th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

20-2 IV2.  Fear  of  premature  death,  coarse  food,  cold  fever,  dysentery,  wounds,  danger  from 
thieves,  separation  from  wife  and  children  etc.,  will  be  the  results,  if  Ketu  is  in  Randhr,  or 
Vyaya  from  Lagn,  or  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

22-23.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Ketu  is  in  Dhan,  or  Yuvati.  Remedial  measure  to 
obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  regain  enjoyments  of  life  by  the  beneficence  of 
Ketu  is  giving  a  goat  in  charity. 

24-271//2.  Effects,  like  marriage,  birth  of  a  son,  gain  of  wealth,  sound  health,  well-being  in  the 
family,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  enjoyments  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  honours,  gain  of 
clothes,  ornaments,  conveyance  and  other  desired  objects,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha 
of  Sukr  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  associated  with,  or 
receiving  a  Drishti  from  benefics.  If  during  the  period  of  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  Guru  is 
favourable  in  transit,  there  will  be  dawn  of  fortune  and  growth  of  property.  If  Sani  is 
favourable  in  transit,  there  will  be  Raj  Yog  effects,  or  the  accomplishment  of  Yog  rites  (Yog 
Triya  Siddhi). 


28-29.  Distress  to  wife,  loss  of  position,  mental  agony,  quarrels  with  close  relations  etc.  will 
be  the  results,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  if  Sukr  is  combust,  or,  if  Sukr  is  in  Ari, 
Randhr,  or  Vyaya. 

30-3 IV2.  Fulfillment  of  ambitions  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  charities,  performance  of 
religious  rites,  creation  of  interest  in  the  study  of  Shastras,  composition  of  poems,  interest  in 
Vedanta  etc.,  listening  to  Puranas,  happiness  from  wife  and  children  will  be  experienced,  if 
Sukr  is  in  Dharm,  Labh,  or  Kendr  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

32-34.  There  will  be  eye  trouble,  fevers,  loss  of  good  conduct,  dental  problems,  heart  disease, 
pain  in  arms,  danger  from  drowning,  or  falling  from  a  tree,  antagonism  towards  relations  with 
the  officials  of  government  and  brothers,  if  Sukr  is  in  the  6l ,  8* ,  or  12*  from  the  Lord  of  the 
Dasha. 

35-36.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Sukr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  regain  enjoyment  and  good  health 
is  by  the  beneficence  of  Goddess  Durga  and  the  performance  of  Durga  Saptashati  Path  and 
giving  a  cow,  or  a  female  buffalo  in  charity. 

Il-I&A.  Effects,  like  good  relations  with  one's  employer,  well-being  in  the  family,  happiness 
from  children,  gain  of  conveyances  and  cattle  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of 
Surya  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if  Surya  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if  Surya  is 
associated  with  Dharm' s  Lord,  or,  if  Surya  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  associated  with,  or 
receiving  a  Drishti  from  benefics. 

39-41.  There  will  be  heart  disease,  defamation,  loss  of  position,  mental  agony,  separation 
from  close  relatives,  obstacles  in  industrial  ventures,  fevers,  fears,  loss  of  kinsmen,  loss  of 
articles,  dear  to  the  person,  if  Surya  is  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Surya  is  in  the  8th,  or  12th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

42.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Surya  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  worship  of 
Surya  is  the  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects. 

43-45.  Effects,  like  gains  of  conveyance,  garments,  ornaments,  improvement  of  fortune  and 
enjoyments,  taking  care  of  brothers,  happiness  in  both  maternal  and  paternal  homes,  increase 
in  cattle  wealth  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if 
Candr  is  full,  in  her  exaltation,  or  in  her  own  Rasi,  or  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or  in  the  1 1*  from 
the  Dasha  Lord,  or,  if  Candr  receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics. 

46-481//2.  There  will  be  great  distress,  wrath,  separation  from  parents,  ill  health  of  children, 
losses  in  business,  irregular  meals,  administration  of  medicines,  if  Candr  is  waning,  if  Candr 
is  associated  with,  or  receives  Drishti  from  malefics,  or,  if  Candr  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or, 
if  Candr  is  in  malefic  Navahs,  or,  if  Candr  is  in  the  Rasi  of  a  malefic  Grah.  There  will, 
however,  be  good  effects  and  some  gain  of  wealth  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha. 

49-501//2.  Enjoyment  of  conveyances  and  garments,  happiness  from  kinsmen,  happiness  from 
parents,  wife,  employer  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  the  1 1th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 


51-52.  Effects,  like  sleepiness,  lethargy,  loss  of  position,  loss  of  enjoyments,  increase  in  the 
number  of  enemies,  antagonism  with  kinsmen,  will  be  experienced,  if  Candr  is  weak  and  is  in 
the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

53-54.  There  will  be  lethargy  and  physical  distress,  if  Candr  is  Dhan',  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  prolongation  of  longevity 
are  Havan  and  giving  jaggery,  Ghl,  rice,  mixed  with  curd,  a  cow,  or  a  female  buffalo  in 
charity. 

55-57.  Effects,  like  enjoyments,  gain  of  wealth,  reverence  from  the  king,  gain  of  conveyances, 
clothes  and  ornaments,  attainment  of  the  position  of  a  Commander  of  the  Army,  increase  in 
agricultural  and  cattle  wealth,  construction  of  a  new  house,  happiness  to  kinsmen,  will  be 
derived  from  the  very  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if 
Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if  Mangal  is  associated  with  Lagn's  Lord,  or 
with  the  Dasha  Lord. 

58-60.  There  will  be  loss  of  wealth,  danger  of  wounds,  danger  from  thieves,  snakes,  weapons, 
gout  and  other  similar  diseases,  distress  to  father  and  brothers,  quarrels  with  copartners,  loss 
of  kinsmen,  coarse  food,  going  away  to  foreign  lands,  unnecessary  expenditure  etc.,  if  Mangal 
is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or  combust,  or  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  and  associated  with,  or 
receiving  a  Drishti  from  malefics. 

61-62.  Great  distress,  dependence  on  others  and  fear  of  premature  death,  may  be  expected,  if 
Mangal  is  in  Dhan,  or,  if  Mangal  is  Yuvati's,  or  Randhr's  Lord.  The  remedial  measures  to 
obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  performance  of  Havan  and  giving  a  bull  in 
charity. 

63-64.  Effects,  like  quarrels,  mental  agony,  physical  distress,  agony,  antagonism  with  the 
sons,  danger  from  diseases,  unnecessary  expenditure,  discord  with  close  relations,  danger 
from  the  government,  foreign  journeys,  loss  of  house  and  agricultural  lands,  will  be  derived  in 
the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if  Rahu  not  be  in  his  house  of  exaltation,  or 
any  other  auspicious  position. 

65-67.  Enjoyment,  gains  of  wealth,  increase  in  agricultural  production,  devotion  to  deities  and 
Brahmins,  pilgrimage  to  holy  places,  increase  in  cattle  wealth,  well-being  in  the  family  will  be 
the  results  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  if  Rahu  is  associated  with  Lagn's  Lord, 
or  a  Yog  Karak  Grah,  or,  if  Rahu  is  in  his  exaltation,  or  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if  Rahu  is  in  a 
Kendr,  or  Labh  from  Lagn,  or  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  There  will  be  cordiality  with  the 
king  and  happiness  from  friends  in  the  middle  portion  of  the  Antar  Dasha. 

68-68V2.  There  will  be  acquisition  of  elephants,  opulence  and  glory,  cordial  relations  with  the 
king,  gains  of  valuable  clothes,  if  Rahu  is  in  Mesh,  Kanya,  Kark,  Vrishabh,  Meen,  or  Dhanu. 

69-70.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Rahu  is  associated  with  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord. 
The  remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  Mrityunjaya  Japa  and 
giving  a  goat  in  charity. 

71-731/2.  Effects,  like  success  all-round,  well-being  in  the  family,  gain  of  conveyances, 
ornaments  and  clothes  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  reverence,  devotion  to  deities  and  the 
preceptor,  association  with  men  of  learning,  happiness  from  wife  and  children  etc.,  will  be 


derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  the  Dasha  of  Sani,  if  Guru  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  a  Trikon, 
or,  if  Guru  is  associated  with  Lagn's  Lord,  or,  if  Guru  is  in  his  own,  or  in  his  exaltation  Rasi. 

74-751/2.  Results,  like  death  of  the  near  relations,  loss  of  wealth,  antagonism  with  the 
government  officials,  failure  in  projects,  journeys  to  foreign  lands,  affliction  with  diseases, 
like  leprosy  etc.,  will  be  experienced,  if  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or,  if  Guru  is 
associated  with  malefics,  or,  if  Guru  is  in  Ari,  Sahaj,  or  Vyaya. 

76-78.  There  will  be  opulence  and  glory,  happiness  to  wife,  gains  through  the  king,  comforts 
of  good  food  and  clothes,  religious-mindedness,  name  and  fame  in  the  country,  interest  in 
Vedas  and  Vedanta,  performance  of  religious  sacrifices,  giving  grains  etc.  in  charily,  if  Guru 
is  in  the  5th,  9th,  1 1th,  2nd,  or  Kendr  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

79-80.  Antagonism  with  kinsmen,  mental  agony,  quarrels,  loss  of  position,  losses  in  ventures, 
loss  of  wealth,  as  a  result  of  imposition  of  fines,  or  penalties  by  government,  imprisonment 
distress  to  wife  and  son  will  be  the  results,  if  Guru  is  weak  and  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from 
the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

81-82.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  agony,  death  of  the  native,  or  any  member  of  the 
family,  if  Guru  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the 
above  evil  effects  are  recitation  of  Shiva  Sahasranam  and  giving  gold  in  charity. 

Ch.  58.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Budh 

1-3  VI  Gain  of  jewels,  like  pearls  etc.,  learning,  increase  in  happiness  and  performance  of 
pious  deeds,  success  in  the  educational  sphere,  acquisition  of  name  and  fame,  meeting  with 
new  kings,  gain  of  wealth  and  happiness  from  wife,  children  and  parents  will  be  the  effects  in 
the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh  in  his  own  Dasha,  if  Budh  is  placed  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  or  is 
otherwise  well  placed. 

There  will  be  loss  of  wealth  and  cattle,  antagonism  with  kinsmen,  diseases,  like  stomach 
pains,  piety  in  discharging  duties,  as  a  government  official,  if  Budh  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi 
etc.,  or,  if  Budh  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Budh  is  associated  with  malefics. 

4-5.  Distress  to  wife,  death  of  members  of  the  family,  affliction  with  diseases,  like 
rheumatism  and  stomach  pains  etc.  will  result,  if  Budh  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Remedial 
measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects,  is  recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam. 

6-81//2.  Effects,  like  physical  fitness,  little  gain  of  wealth,  affectionate  relations  with  kinsmen, 
increase  in  cattle  wealth,  income  from  industries,  success  in  the  educational  sphere, 
acquisition  of  name  and  fame,  honours,  audience  with  the  king  and  joining  a  banquet  with 
him,  comforts  of  clothes  etc.,  will  be  experienced,  if  Ketu  is  associated  with  benefics  in  a 
Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or,  if  Ketu  is  yuti  with  Lagn's  Lord,  or  with  a  Yog  Karak.  The  same  will  be 
the  results,  if  Ketu  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  in  the  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

9-11.  Fall  from  a  conveyance,  distress  to  son,  danger  from  the  king,  indulgence  in  sinful 
deeds,  danger  from  scorpions  etc.,  quarrels  with  the  menials,  sorrow,  diseases  and  association 
with  menials  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Ketu  is  yuti  with  malefics  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from  the 
Lord  of  the  Dasha. 


12.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Ketu  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial  measure 
to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects,  is  giving  a  goat  in  charity. 

13-15/4.  Effects,  like  inclination  to  perform  religious  rites,  fulfillment  of  all  ambitions 
through  the  help  of  the  king  and  friends,  gains  of  agricultural  lands  and  happiness  etc.  will  be 
derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  in  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  Labh,  in 
Putr,  or  in  Dharm.  There  will  be  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  gain  of  wealth  and  property, 
construction  of  a  reservoir,  readiness  to  give  charities  and  to  perform  religious  rites, 
extraordinary  gain  of  wealth  and  gains  in  business,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  in  the  5th,  9th,  or  1 1th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

16-17V2.  Heart  disease,  defamation,  fevers,  dysentery,  separation  from  kinsmen,  physical 

distress 

Dasha. 


distress  and  agony  will  result,  if  Sukr  is  weak  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord,  or  the 


18-19.  There  will  be  fear  of  premature  death,  if  Sukr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  to  recite  Mantras  of  Goddess 
Durga. 

20-22.  Effects,  like  dawn  of  fortune  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  happiness  from  friends 
etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  Surya  is  in  his  own, 
or  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  or  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or  in  Dhan,  or  Labh,  or  in  his  exalted,  or 
own  Navahs.  There  will  be  acquisition  of  land,  if  Surya  receives  a  Drishti  from  Mangal  and 
comforts  of  good  food  and  clothes,  if  such  a  Surya  receives  a  Drishti  from  Lagn's  Lord. 

23-24.  Fear,  or  danger  from  thieves,  fire  and  weapons,  bilious  troubles,  headaches,  mental 
agony  and  separation  from  friends  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Surya  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya 
from  Lagn,  or  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  and,  if  Surya  is  weak  and  associated  with  Sani, 
Mangal  and  Rahu. 

25.  There  will  be  fear  of  premature  death,  if  Surya  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Worship  of 
Surya  is  the  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects. 

26-27.  The  Yog  becomes  very  strong  for  beneficial  effects,  if  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr  in 
the  Dasha  of  Budh  Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon  from  Lagn,  or,  if  Candr  is  in  her  exaltation, 
or  in  her  own  Rasi,  associated  with,  or  receiving  a  Drishti  from  Guru,  or,  if  Candr  is  a  Yog 
Karak  herself.  Then  there  will  be  marriage,  birth  of  a  son  and  gain  of  clothes  and  ornaments. 

28-291//2.  In  the  circumstances,  mentioned  above,  there  will  also  be  construction  of  a  new 
house,  availability  of  sweetish  preparations,  enjoyment  of  music,  study  of  Shastras,  journey  to 
the  South,  gains  of  clothes  from  beyond  the  seas,  gain  of  gems,  like  pearls  etc. 

30-3  P/4.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Candr  is  in  her  debilitation,  or  in  an  enemy's  Rasi. 
If  Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  in  the  3r ,  or  1  \x  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  there  will  be  at 
the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha  visits  to  sacred  shrines,  patience,  enthusiasm  and  gains 
of  wealth  from  foreign  countries. 

32-33.  Danger  from  the  king,  fire  and  thieves,  defamation,  or  disgrace  and  loss  of  wealth  on 
account  of  wife,  destruction  of  agricultural  lands  and  cattle  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Candr  is 
weak  and  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 


34-35.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Candr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  There  will  be 
relief,  prolongation  of  longevity  and  restoration  of  comforts  by  the  beneficence  of  Goddess 
Durga,  if  the  Mantras  of  the  Goddess  are  recited  in  the  prescribed  manner  and  clothes  are 
given  in  charity. 

36-38Vi  Effects,  like  well-being  and  enjoyments  in  the  family  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king, 
increase  in  property,  recovery  of  a  lost  kingdom  etc.,  birth  of  a  son,  satisfaction,  acquisition  of 
cattle,  conveyances  and  agricultural  lands,  happiness  from  wife  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi, 
in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or,  if  Mangal  is  asociated  with  Lagn's  Lord. 

39-40V2.  Physical  distress,  mental  agony,  obstacles  in  industrial  ventures,  loss  of  wealth,  gout, 
distress  from  wounds  and  danger  from  weapons  and  fever  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Mangal  be 
associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  malefics  in  Randhr,  or  in  Vyaya. 

41-42.  There  will  be  gain  of  wealth,  physical  felicity,  birth  of  a  son,  good  reputation, 
affectionate  relations  etc.  with  kinsmen  etc.,  if  Mangal  recieves  a  Drishti  from  benefics  in  a 
Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  the  1  ll  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

43-441//2.  If  Mangal  be  associated  with  malefics  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha, 
there  will  be  distress,  danger  from  kinsmen,  wrath  of  the  king  and  fire,  antagonism  with  the 
son,  loss  of  position  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  enjoyments  and  gains  of 
wealth  in  the  middle  portion  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  danger  from  the  king  and  loss  of  position  at 
the  end  of  the  Antar  Dasha. 

45-46.  There  will  be  fear  of  premature  death,  if  Mangal  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  Mrityunjaya 
Japa  and  giving  a  cow  in  charily. 

47-49.  Effects,  like  reverence  from  the  king,  good  reputation,  gain  of  wealth,  visits  to  sacred 
shrines,  performance  of  religious  sacrifices  and  oblations,  recognition,  gain  of  clothes  etc.,  are 
derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  Rahu  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or, 
if  Rahu  is  in  Mesh,  Kumbh,  Kanya,  or  Vrishabh.  There  will  be  some  evil  effects  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  but  all  will  be  well  later. 

51.  There  will  be  an  opportunity  to  have  conversation,  or  a  meeting  with  the  king,  if  Rahu  is 
in  Sahaj,  Randhr,  Karm,  or  Labh.  In  this  position,  if  Rahu  be  associated  with  a  benefic,  there 
will  be  a  visit  to  a  new  king. 

52-53.  Pressure  of  hard  work,  as  a  government  functionary,  loss  of  position,  fears, 
imprisonment,  diseases,  agony  to  self  and  kinsmen,  heart  disease,  loss  of  reputation  and 
wealth,  will  be  the  results,  if  Rahu  is  associated  with  a  malefic,  or  malefics  in  the  8th,  or  12th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

54-55.  There  will  be  fear  of  premature  death,  if  Rahu  is  in  Dhan,  or  in  Ari.  The  remedial 
measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects,  are  recitation  of  Mantras  of  Goddess 
Durga  and  Goddess  Lakshmi  in  the  prescribed  manner  and  giving  a  tawny-coloured  cow,  or 
female  buffalo  in  charily. 


Se-SS1/^.  Effects,  like  physical  felicity,  gain  of  wealth,  beneficence  of  the  king,  celebration  of 
auspicious  functions,  like  marriage  etc.,  at  home,  availability  of  sweetish  preparations, 
increase  in  cattle  wealth,  attending  discourses  on  Puranas  etc.,  devotion  to  deities  and  the 
preceptor,  interest  in  religion,  charities  etc.,  worship  of  Lord  Shiva  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  Guru  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  or,  if 
Guru  is  in  his  exaltation,  or  in  his  own  Rasi. 

59-61.  Discord  with  king  and  kinsmen,  danger  from  thieves  etc.,  death  of  parents,  disgrace, 
punishment  from  government,  loss  of  wealth,  danger  from  snakes  and  poison,  fever,  losses  in 
agricultural  production,  loss  of  lands  etc.,  will  be  the  results,  if  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi, 
is  combust,  or  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  in  Vyaya,  or,  if  Guru  is  associated  with,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  Sani  and  Mangal. 

62-63 V2.  There  will  be  happiness  from  kinsmen  and  from  one's  son,  enthusiasm,  increase  in 
wealth  and  name  and  fame,  giving  grains  etc.  in  charity,  if  Guru  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in 
the  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  and,  if  Guru  is  endowed  with  strength. 

64-64!/2.  Agony,  anxiety,  danger  from  diseases,  antagonism  with  wife  and  kinsmen,  wrath  of 
the  king,  quarrels,  loss  of  wealth,  danger  from  Brahmins  will  be  the  results,  if  Guru  is  weak 
and,  if  Guru  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

65-66.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Guru  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord,  or,  if  Guru  is  in 
Dhan,  or  Yuvati.  The  remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are 
recitation  of  Shiva  Sahasranam  and  giving  a  cow  and  gold  in  charily. 

67-681/2.  Effects,  like  well-being  in  the  family,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  enthusiasm,  increase 
in  cattle  wealth,  gain  of  a  position,  visits  to  sacred  shrines  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar 
Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of  Budh,  if  Sani  is  in  his  exaltation,  his  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  a 
Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or  in  Labh. 

69-70V2.  Danger  from  enemies,  distress  to  wife  and  children,  loss  of  thinking  power,  loss  of 
kinsmen,  loss  in  ventures,  mental  agony,  journeys  to  foreign  lands  and  bad  dreams  will  be  the 
results,  if  Sani  is  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

71-72.  There  will  be  fear  of  premature  death,  if  Sani  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  regain  sound  health  are 
performance  of  Mrityunjaya  Japa  and  giving  a  black  cow  and  female  buffalo  in  charity. 

Ch.  59.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Ketu 

I-2V2.  Effects,  like  happiness  from  wife  and  children,  recognition  from  the  king,  but  mental 
agony,  gain  of  land,  village  etc.  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  his  own  Dasha, 
if  Ketu  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or,  if  Ketu  is  related  to  Dharm's,  Karm's,  or  Bandhu's  Lord. 

3-4.  Heart  disease,  defamation,  destruction  of  wealth  and  cattle,  distress  to  wife  and  children, 
instability  of  mind  etc.  will  we  be  the  results,  if  Ketu  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi  and,  if  Ketu  is 
in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya  along  with  a  combust  Grah. 

5-6.  There  will  be  danger  from  diseases,  great  distress  and  separation  from  kinsmen,  if  Ketu  is 
related  to  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord,  or,  if  Ketu  is  in  Dhan,  or  Yuvati.  The  remedial  measures 


to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  performance  of  Durga  Saptashati  Japa  and 
Mrityunjaya  Japa. 

7-9V2.  Effects,  like  beneficence  from  the  king,  good  fortune,  gain  of  clothes  etc.,  recovery  of 
lost  kingdom,  comforts  of  conveyances  etc.,  visits  to  sacred  shrines  and  gain  of  lands  and 
villages  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  in  the 
Dasha  of  Ketu,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if  Sukr  is  associated  with 
Karm's  Lord  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon  and  there  will  be  dawn  of  fortune,  if  in  such  position  he  is 
associated  with  Dharm's  Lord  also. 


10-11.  Sound  health,  well-being  in  the  family  and  gains  of  good  food  and  conveyances  etc. 

will  be 

Dasha. 


will  be  the  results,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  the  3r  ,  or  1  \x  from  the  Lord  of  the 


12-14.  There  will  be  quarrels  without  any  cause,  loss  of  wealth,  distress  to  cattle,  if  Sukr  is  in 
the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  If  Sukr  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or,  if  Sukr  is 
associated  with  a  debilitated  Grah,  or,  if  Sukr  is  in  Ari,  or  Randhr,  there  will  be  quarrels  with 
kinsmen,  headaches,  eye  troubles,  heart  disease,  defamation,  loss  of  wealth  and  distress  to 
cattle  and  wife. 

15.  Physical  distress  and  mental  agony  will  be  caused,  if  Sukr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord. 
The  remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  performance  of  Durga 
Path  and  giving  a  tawny-coloured  cow,  or  female  buffalo  in  charity. 

16-17.  The  effects,  like  gains  of  wealth,  beneficence  of  the  king,  performance  of  pious  deeds 
and  fulfillment  of  all  ambitions,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Dasha 
Ketu,  if  Surya  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if  Surya  is  associated  with,  or  receives  a 
Drishti  from  a  benefic  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Labh. 

18-19Vi  Danger  from  the  king,  separation  from  parents,  journeys  to  foreign  lands,  distress 
from  thieves,  snakes  and  poison,  punishment  by  government,  antagonism  with  the  friends, 
sorrows,  danger  from  fever  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Surya  is  associated  with  a  malefic,  or 
malefics  in  Randhr,  or  in  Vyaya. 

20-21.  There  will  be  physical  fitness,  gain  of  wealth,  or  the  birth  of  a  son,  success  in 
performance  of  pious  deeds,  headship  of  a  small  village  etc.,  if  Surya  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  in 
the  2nd,  or  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

22-24.  Obstacles  in  availability  of  food,  fears  and  loss  of  wealth  and  cattle  will  be  the  results, 
if  Surya  is  associated  with  evil  Grahas  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  There 
will  be  distress  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha  with  some  mitigation  at  its  end. 
There  will  be  fear  of  premature  death,  if  Surya  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  and  to  regain  comforts  by  the  beneficence 
of  Surya  is  to  give  a  cow  and  gold  in  charity. 

25-28.  Effects,  like  recognition  from  the  king,  enthusiasm,  well-being,  enjoyments, 
acquisition  of  a  house,  lands  etc.,  abnormal  gains  of  food,  clothes,  conveyances,  cattle  etc., 
success  in  business,  construction  of  reservoirs  etc.  and  happiness  to  wife  and  children,  will  be 
derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr  in  the  Dasha  of  Ketu,  if  Candr  is  in  her  exaltation,  in  her 


own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  in  Labh,  or  in  Dhan.  The  beneficial  results  will  be  realized 
fully,  if  Candr  is  waxing. 

29-30.  Unhappiness  and  mental  agony,  obstacles  in  ventures,  separation  from  parents,  losses 
in  business,  destruction  of  cattle  etc.  will  be  caused,  if  Candr  is  in  her  debilitation  Rasi,  or  in 
Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya. 

31-33.  There  will  be  the  acquisition  of  a  cow,  or  cows,  land,  agricultural  lands,  meeting 
kinsmen  and  the  achievement  of  success  through  them,  increase  in  cows  milk  and  curd,  if 
Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  the  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  and,  if  Candr  is 
endowed  with  strength.  There  will  be  auspicious  results  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar 
Dasha,  cordial  relations  with  the  king  in  the  middle  portion  of  the  Antar  Dasha  and  danger 
from  the  king,  foreign  journey,  or  journeys  to  distant  places  at  its  end. 

34-36.  Loss  of  wealth,  anxiety,  enmity  with  kinsmen  and  distress  to  brother,  will  be  the 
results,  if  Candr  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  If  Candr  is  Dhan's, 
Yuvati's,  or  Randhr' s  Lord,  there  will  be  fear  of  premature  death.  The  remedial  measures  to 
obtain  relief  from  the  above  effects  are  recitation  of  Mantras  of  Candr  and  giving  in  charity 
things,  connected  with  Candr. 

37-39.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  land,  village  etc.,  increase  in  wealth  and  cattle,  laying  out  of 
a  new  garden,  gain  of  wealth  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar 
Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the  Dasha  of  Ketu,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  if 
Mangal  is  associated  with,  or,  receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics.  If  Mangal  is  related  to 
Dharm's,  or  Karm's  Lord,  there  will  definitely  be  gain  of  land  and  enjoyment. 


40.  There  will  be  recognition  from  the  king,  great  popularity  and  reputation  and  happiness 
from  children 
of  the  Dasha. 


from  children  and  friends,  if  Mangal  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  the  3r  ,  or  1  ll  from  the  Lord 


41-42.  There  will  be  fear  of  death/disaster  during  a  foreign  journey,  diabetes,  unnecessary 
troubles,  danger  from  thieves  and  the  king  and  quarrels,  if  Mangal  is  in  the  8th,  12th,  or  2nd 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  In  the  above  circumstances  amidst  evil  effects  there  will  be  some 
auspicious  effects  also. 

43-44.  High  fever,  danger  from  poison,  distress  to  wife,  mental  agony  and  fear  of  premature 
death  will  be  the  results,  if  Mangal  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  By  the  beneficence  of  Mangal 
there  will  be  enjoyment  and  gain  of  property,  if,  as  a  remedial  measure,  a  bull  is  given  in 
charity. 

45-47.  Effects,  like  increase  of  wealth  and  gain  of  wealth,  grains,  cattle,  lands,  village  from  a 
Yavan  king,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Ketu,  if  Rahu  is  in  his 
exaltation,  his  own,  in  a  friends  Rasi,  or  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  or  Sahaj,  or  Dhan. 
There  will  be  some  trouble  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasha,  but  all  will  be  well  later. 

48-50.  Frequent  urination,  weakness  in  the  body,  cold  fever,  danger  from  thieves,  intermittent 
fever,  opprobrium,  quarrels,  diabetes,  pain  in  stomach  will  be  the  results,  if  Rahu  is  associated 
with  a  malefic  in  Randhr,  or  in  Vyaya.  There  will  be  distress  and  danger,  if  Rahu  is  in  Dhan, 
or  in  Yuvati.  The  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  Durga 
Saptashati  Path. 


51-54.  Effects,  like  increase  in  wealth  and  grains,  beneficence  of  the  king,  enthusiasm,  gain  of 
conveyances  etc.,  celebration,  like  birth  of  a  son  at  home,  performance  of  pious  deeds, 
Yagyas,  conquest  of  the  enemy  and  enjoyments,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in 
the  Dasha  of  Ketu,  if  Guru  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  is  associated  with  Lagn's, 
Dharm's,  or  Karm's  Lord  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon. 

55-56.  Danger  from  thieves,  snakes  and  wounds,  destruction  of  wealth,  separation  from  wife 
and  children,  physical  distress  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or  in 
Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya.  Though  some  good  effects  may  be  felt  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Antar  Dasha,  there  will  be  only  adverse  results  later. 

57-5SV2.  There  will  be  gains  of  many  varieties  of  garments,  ornaments  by  the  beneficence  of 
the  king,  foreign  journeys,  taking  care  of  kinsmen,  availability  of  decent  food,  if  Guru  is 
associated  with  a  benefic  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  in  the  3rd,  or  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

59-60.  Fear  of  premature  death  will  be  caused,  if  Guru  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  Mrityunjaya  Japa  and 
recitation  of  Shiva  Sahasranama. 

6I-62V2.  Effects,  like  distress  to  oneself  and  one's  kinsmen,  agony,  increase  in  cattle  wealth, 
loss  of  wealth,  as  a  result  of  imposition  of  fines  by  government,  resignation  from  the  existing 
post,  journeys  to  foreign  lands  and  danger  of  thieves  during  travelling,  will  be  derived  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of  Ketu,  if  Sani  is  deprived  of  strength  and  dignity.  There 
will  be  loss  of  wealth  and  lethargy,  if  Sani  is  in  Randhr,  or  Vyaya. 

63-65.  Success  in  all  ventures,  happiness  from  the  employer,  comforts  during  journeys, 
increase  in  happiness  and  property  in  ones  own  village,  audience  with  the  king  etc.  will  be  the 
results,  if  Sani  is  in  a  Trikon  in  Meen,  in  Tula,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if  Sani  is  in  an  auspicious 
Navahs,  or  is  associated  with  a  benefic  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  Sahaj.  (According  to  Brihat 
Jatak,  Sani  in  Tula,  Meen,  Dhanu,  Makar  and  Kumbh  in  Lagn  gives  Raj  Yog). 

67-68.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  agony,  obstacles  in  ventures,  lethargy,  defamation, 
death  of  parents,  if  Sani  is  associated  with  a  malefic,  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of 
the  Dasha.  Fear  of  premature  death  may  be  expected,  if  Sani  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  performance  of  Havan  with 
sesame  seeds  (Til)  and  giving  a  black  cow,  or  female  buffalo  in  charity. 

69-71.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  enjoyments,  charities,  gain  of  wealth  and  land, 
birth  of  a  son,  celebration  of  religious  functions  and  functions,  like  marriage  suddenly,  well- 
being  in  the  family,  gain  of  clothes,  ornaments  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of 
Budh  in  the  Dasha  of  Ketu,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or,  if  Budh  is  in  his  exaltation,  or 
in  his  own  Rasi. 

72.  There  will  be  association  with  men  of  learning,  dawn  of  fortune  and  listening  to  religious 
discourses,  if  Budh  is  associated  with  Dharm's,  or  Karm's  Lord. 

73-74 V2.  Antagonism  with  government  officials,  residing  in  other  people's  houses,  destruction 
of  wealth,  clothes,  conveyances  and  cattle  will  be  the  results,  if  Budh  is  associated  with  Sani, 
Mangal,  or  Rahu  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya.  There  will  be  some  beneficial  effects  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Dasha,  still  better  results  in  the  middle,  but  inauspicious  at  the  end. 


75-76.  There  will  be  good  health,  happiness  from  one's  son,  opulence  and  glory,  availability 
of  good  food  and  clothes  and  abnormal  profits  in  business,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in 
the  1 1*  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

77-79.  Distress,  unhappiness  and  troubles  to  wife  and  children  and  danger  from  the  king  may 
be  expected  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  if  Budh  is  weak  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th 
from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  There  will,  however,  be  visits  to  sacred  places  in  the  middle  of 
the  Dasha.  Fear  of  premature  death  will  be  caused,  if  Budh  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The 
remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  recitation  of  Vishnu 
Sahasranam. 

Ch.  60.  Effects  of  the  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr 

1-2V2.  Effects,  like  gain  of  wealth,  cattle  etc.  through  Brahmins,  celebrations  in  connection 
with  the  birth  of  a  son,  well-being,  recognition  from  the  king,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  will 
be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sukr  in  his  own  Dasha,  if  Sukr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in 
Labh  and,  if  Sukr  is  endowed  with  strength. 

3-6.  Construction  of  a  new  house,  availability  of  sweet  preparations,  happiness  to  wife  and 
children,  companionship  with  a  friend,  giving  grains  etc.  in  charily,  beneficence  of  the  king, 
gain  of  clothes,  conveyances  and  ornaments,  success  in  business,  increase  in  the  number  of 
cattle,  gain  of  garments  by  performing  journeys  in  the  western  direction  etc.  will  be  the 
results,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or,  if  Sukr  is  in  his  exalted,  or  own 
Navahs. 

7-8.  There  will  be  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  enthusiasm,  beneficence  of  the  king,  well-being 
in  the  family,  increase  in  the  number  of  wives,  children  and  wealth  etc.,  if  Sukr  is  associated 
with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  benefic  and  is  in  a  friendly  Navahs,  in  Sahaj,  Ari,  or  Labh. 

9-10.  Danger  from  thieves  etc.,  antagonistic  relations  with  government  officials,  destruction 
of  friends  and  kinsmen,  distress  to  wife  and  children  may  be  expected,  if  Sukr  is  associated 
with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  a  malefic  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya. 

11.  There  will  be  fear  of  death,  if  Sukr  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  Remedial  measures  to 
obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  are  Durga  Path  and  giving  a  cow  in  charity. 

12.  There  will  be  a  period  of  agony,  wrath  of  the  king,  quarrels  with  the  coparceners  etc.  in 
the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  Surya  is  in  any  Rasi,  other  than  his 
exaltation,  or  debilitation  Rasi.  (This  verse  does  not  appear  to  be  correctly  worded,  because 
Surya  does  produce  good  effects  in  a  position,  other  than  exaltation,  or  debilitation.  The 
position  is  correctly  stated  in  the  Chowkambh  version  of  this  verse) 

13-15.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  a  kingdom  and  wealth,  happiness  from  wife  and  children, 
happiness  from  employer,  meeting  with  friends,  happiness  from  parents,  marriage,  name  and 
fame,  betterment  of  fortune,  birth  of  a  son  etc.,  will  be  experienced,  if  Surya  is  in  his 
exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  in  Dhan,  or  Labh,  or  in  Kendr,  Trikon,  in  the 
2nd,  or  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  he  Dasha. 

16-18.  Distress,  agony,  distress  to  members  of  the  family,  harsh  language,  distress  to  father, 
loss  of  kinsmen,  wrath  of  the  king,  danger  at  home,  many  diseases,  destruction  of  agricultural 


production  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if  Surya  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Surya  is  in  his 
debilitation,  or  in  an  enemy's  Rasi. 

19-20.  There  will  be  evil  influence  of  the  Grahas,  if  Surya  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord. 
Worship  of  Surya  is  the  remedial  measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects. 

21-22.  Effects,  like  gain  of  wealth,  conveyances,  clothes  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king, 
happiness  in  the  family,  great  opulence  and  glory,  devotion  to  deities  and  Brahmins,  will  be 
derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Candr  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  Candr  is  in  her  exaltation,  or  in 
her  own  Rasi,  or  is  associated  with  the  Lord  of  Dharm,  benefics,  or  with  Karm's  Lord,  or,  if 
Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  Labh. 

23-231//2.  In  the  above  circumstances  there  will  also  be  association  with  musicians  and  men  of 
learning  and  receiving  of  decorations,  gain  of  cows,  buffaloes  and  other  cattle,  abnormal 
profits  in  business,  dining  with  brothers  etc. 

24-261//2.  Loss  of  wealth,  fears,  physical  distress,  agony,  wrath  of  the  king,  journeys  to  foreign 
lands,  or  pilgrimage,  distress  to  wife  and  children  and  separation  from  kinsmen  will  be  the 
results,  if  Candr  is  in  her  debilitation  Rasi,  is  combust,  or  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if 
Candr  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

27-29.  There  will  be  sovereignly  over  a  province,  or  village  by  the  beneficence  of  the  king, 
clothes  etc.,  construction  of  a  reservoir,  increase  in  wealth  etc.,  if  Candr  is  in  a  Kendr,  or 
Trikon,  or  in  the  3rd,  or  1 1th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  There  will  be  physical  fitness  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha  and  physical  distress  in  its  last  portion. 

30-3 IV2.  Effects,  like  acquisition  of  kingdom,  property,  clothes,  ornaments,  land  and  desired 
objects,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  Mangal  is  in  a 
Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  or,  if  Mangal  is  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  or  is  in  one  of  his  own 
Rasis,  or  is  associated  with  the  Lagn's,  Dharm' s,  or  Karm's  Lord. 

32-34.  There  will  be  fever  from  cold,  diseases  (like  fever)  to  parents,  loss  of  position, 
quarrels,  antagonism  with  the  king  and  government  officials,  extravagant  expenditure  etc.,  if 
Mangal  is  in  Ari,  Randhr,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Mangal  is  in  the  6l  ,  8l  ,  or  12l  from  the  Lord  of  the 
Dasha. 

35.  Physical  distress,  losses  in  profession,  loss  of  village,  land  etc.  will  be  the  results,  if 
Mangal  is  the  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord. 

36-31V2.  Effects,  like  great  enjoyment,  gain  of  wealth,  visits  of  friends,  successful  journeys, 
gain  of  cattle  and  land  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Rahu  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr, 
if  Rahu  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or  in  Labh,  or,  if  Rahu  is  in  his  exaltation,  or  in  his  own  Rasi, 
or  is  associated  with,  or  receives  a  Drishti  from  benefics. 

38-39.  Enjoyments,  destruction  of  enemy,  enthusiasm  and  beneficence  of  the  king  will  be  the 
results,  if  Rahu  is  in  Sahaj,  or  Ari,  or  Karm,  or  Labh.  Good  effects  will  be  experienced  up  to  5 
months  from  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  but  at  the  end  of  the  Dasha  there  will  be 
danger  from  fevers  and  indigestion. 


40-4  VA.  In  the  above  circumstances,  except  for  obstacles  in  ventures  and  journeys  and 
worries,  there  will  be  all  enjoyment,  like  those  of  a  king.  Journeys  to  foreign  lands  will  bring 
success  and  the  person  will  return  safely  to  his  homeland.  There  will  also  be  blessings  from 
Brahmins  and  auspicious  results  consequent  to  visits  to  holy  places. 

42-44.  There  will  be  inauspicious  effects  on  oneself  and  one's  parents  and  antagonism  with 
people,  if  Rahu  be  associated  with  a  malefic  in  the  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 
Physical  distress  will  be  caused,  if  Rahu  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial  measure  to 
obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  Mrityunjaya  Japa. 

45-48.  Effects,  like  recovery  of  the  lost  kingdom,  acquisition  of  desired  grains,  clothes  and 
property  etc.,  reverence  from  one's  friend  and  the  king  and  gain  of  wealth,  recognition  from 
the  king,  good  reputation,  gain  of  conveyances,  association  with  an  employer  and  with  men  of 
learning,  industriousness  in  the  study  of  Shastras,  birth  of  a  son,  satisfaction,  visits  of  close 
friends,  happiness  to  parents  and  son  etc.,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Guru  in  the 
Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  Guru  is  in  his  exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon  to  Lagn, 
or  to  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha. 

49-50.  There  will  be  danger  from  the  king  and  from  thieves,  distress  to  oneself  and  to 
kinsmen,  quarrels,  mental  agony,  loss  of  position,  going  away  to  foreign  lands  and  danger  of 
many  kinds  of  diseases,  if  Guru  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha  and  be 
associated  with  a  malefic. 

51.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Guru  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial  measure 
to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  Mrityunjaya  Japa. 

52-54.  Effects,  like  great  enjoyments,  visits  of  friends  and  kinsmen,  recognition  from  the 
king,  birth  of  a  daughter,  visits  to  holy  places  and  sacred  shrines,  conferment  of  authority  by 
the  king,  will  be  derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Sani  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  Sani  is  in  his 
exaltation,  in  his  own  Rasi,  in  a  Kendr,  Trikon,  or  in  his  own  Navahs. 

55-57.  There  will  be  lethargy  and  more  expenditure  than  income,  if  Sani  is  in  his  debilitation 
Rasi.  Many  kinds  of  distresses  and  troubles  at  the  commencement  of  the  Antar  Dasha,  like 
stress  to  parents,  wife  and  children,  going  away  to  foreign  lands,  losses  in  profession, 
destruction  of  cattle  etc.,  will  be  the  results,  if  Sani  is  in  Randhr,  or  Labh,  or  Vyaya,  or,  if  Sani 
is  in  the  8th,  1 1th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Sani  is 
Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord. 

58-59.  The  remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects,  are  Havan  with 
sesame  seeds  (Til),  Mrityunjaya  Japa,  Durga  Saptashati  Path  (by  oneself,  or  through  a 
Brahmin). 

60-62.  Effects,  like  dawn  of  fortune,  birth  of  a  son,  gain  of  wealth  through  judgement  of  court, 
listening  to  stories  from  the  Puranas,  association  with  persons,  competent  in  poetry  etc.,  visits 
of  close  friends,  happiness  from  employer,  availability  of  sweetish  preparations  etc.,  will  be 
derived  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Budh  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  Budh  is  in  a  Kendr,  or  Trikon,  or 
in  Labh  (from  Lagn,  or  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha),  or  is  in  his  exaltation,  or  in  his  own  Rasi. 

63-65.  If  Budh  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  Dasha,  or,  if  Budh  is  weak,  or  is 
associated  with  a  malefic,  there  will  be  agony,  loss  of  cattle,  residence  in  other  people's 


houses  and  losses  in  business.  There  will  be  some  good  effects  at  the  commencement, 
moderate  in  the  middle  portion  and  distress  from  fever  etc.  at  the  end  of  the  Antar  Dasha. 

66.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Budh  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measure  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  evil  effects  is  the  recitation  of  Vishnu  Sahasranam. 

67-68.  Auspicious  effects,  like  availability  of  sweetish  preparations,  abnormal  gains  in 
profession  and  increase  in  cattle  wealth,  will  be  derived  from  the  very  commencement  of  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Ketu  in  the  Dasha  of  Sukr,  if  Ketu  is  in  his  exaltation,  or  in  his  own  Rasi,  or  is 
related  to  a  Yog  Karak  Grah,  or,  if  Ketu  is  possessed  of  positional  strength.  (It  is  not  laid 
down  anywhere,  in  which  Bhava  Ketu  does  get  positional  strength). 

69-69  V2.  In  the  above  circumstances  there  will  be  definite  victory  in  war  at  the  end  of  the 
Antar  Dasha.  Moderate  results  will  be  experienced  in  the  middle  portion  of  the  Antar  Dasha 
and  sometimes  there  will  also  be  the  feeling  of  distress. 

70-72.  There  will  be  danger  from  snakes,  thieves  and  wounds,  loss  of  power  of  thinking, 
headache,  agony,  quarrels  without  any  cause,  or  reason,  diabetes,  excessive  expenditure, 
antagonism  with  wife  and  children,  going  away  to  foreign  land,  loss  in  ventures,  if  Ketu  is  in 
the  8th,  or  12th  from  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  or,  if  Ketu  is  associated  with  a  malefic. 

73-74.  There  will  be  physical  distress,  if  Ketu  is  Dhan's,  or  Yuvati's  Lord.  The  remedial 
measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  above  effects  are  Mrityunjaya  Japa  and  giving  a  goat  in 
charity.  Remedial  measures  for  appeasing  Sukr  will  also  prove  beneficial. 

Ch.  61.  Effects  of  Pratyantar  Dashas  in  Antar  Dashas 

1.  By  multiplying  the  years  etc.  of  the  Antar  Dasha  of  the  Grahas  separately  by  the  Dasha 
years  of  each  Grah  and  by  dividing  the  product  by  the  total  span  of  the  Vimshottari  Dasha, 
namely  120  years,  we  will  arrive  at  the  Pratyantar  Dasha  of  each  Grah. 

2.  Surya-Surya  (Pratyantar  Dasha  of  Surya  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya).  Argument  with  other 
persons,  loss  of  wealth,  distress  to  wife,  headache  etc.  The  above  are  general  effects.  Such 
inauspicious  effects  will  not  be  produced,  if  Surya  is  in  a  Trikon  etc.,  if  Surya  is  the  Lord  of 
an  auspicious  Bhava,  or  is  in  a  auspicious  Bhava  and  in  a  benefic  Varg.  All  other  Pratyanta 
effects  should  be  judged  in  this  manner. 

3.  ...-Candr.  Excitement,  quarrels,  loss  of  wealth,  mental  agony  etc. 

4.  . .  .-Mangal.  Danger  from  the  king  and  from  weapons,  imprisonment  and  distress  from 
enemies  and  fire. 

5.  . .  .-Rahu.  Disorder  of  phlegm,  danger  from  weapons,  loss  of  wealth,  destruction  of  a 
kingdom  and  mental  agony. 

6.  . .  .-Guru.  Victory,  increase  in  wealth,  gains  of  gold,  garments,  conveyances  etc. 
(7)  ...-Sani.  Loss  of  wealth,  distress  to  cattle,  excitement,  diseases  etc. 


8.  . .  .-Budh.  Affectionate  relations  with  kinsmen,  availability  of  good  food,  gains  of  wealth, 
religious-mindedness,  reverence  from  the  king. 

9.  . .  .-Ketu.  Danger  to  life,  loss  of  wealth,  danger  from  the  king,  trouble  with  enemies. 

10.  . .  .-Sukr.  Moderate  effects,  or  some  gains  of  wealth  may  be  expected. 

11.  Candr-Candr.  Acquisition  of  land,  wealth  and  property,  reverence  from  the  king  and 
availability  of  sweetish  preparations. 

12.  . .  .-Mangal.  Wisdom  and  discretion,  reverence  from  the  people,  increase  in  wealth, 
enjoyments  to  kinsmen,  but  there  will  be  danger  from  an  enemy. 

13.  ...  -Rahu.  Well-being,  gain  of  wealth  from  the  king  and  danger  of  death,  if  Rahu  is  yuti 
with  a  malefic. 

14.  . .  .-Guru.  Enjoyments,  increase  in  dignity  and  glory,  gain  of  knowledge  through  the 
preceptor,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom  and  acquisition  of  gems  etc. 

15.  . .  .-Sani.  Bilious  troubles,  loss  of  wealth  and  name  and  fame. 

16.  . .  .-Budh.  Birth  of  a  son,  acquisition  of  a  horse  and  other  conveyances,  success  in 
education,  progress,  gain  of  white  garments  and  grains. 

17.  . .  .-Ketu.  Quarrels  with  Brahmins,  fear  of  premature  death,  loss  of  happiness  and  distress 
all-round. 

18.  ...-Sukr.  Gain  of  wealth,  enjoyments,  birth  of  a  daughter,  availability  of  sweet 
preparations  and  cordial  relations  with  all. 

19.  ...-Surya.  Gain  of  happiness,  grains  and  garments,  victories  everywhere. 

20.  Mangal -Mangal.  Danger  from  enemies,  quarrels  and  fear  of  premature  death  on  account 
of  blood  diseases. 

21.  . .  .-Rahu.  Destruction  of  wealth  and  kingdom  (fall  of  government),  unpalatable  food  and 
quarrels  with  the  enemy. 

22.  . .  .-Guru.  Loss  of  intelligence,  distress,  sorrows  to  children,  fear  of  premature  death, 
negligence,  quarrels  and  no  fulfillment  of  any  ambition. 

23.  ...-Sani.  Destruction  of  the  employer,  distress,  loss  of  wealth,  danger  from  enemies, 
anxiety,  quarrels  and  sorrows. 

24.  ...-Budh.  Loss  of  intelligence,  loss  of  wealth,  fevers  and  loss  of  grains,  garments  and 
friends. 

25.  . .  .-Ketu.  Distress  from  diseases,  lethargy,  premature  death,  danger  from  the  king  and 
weapons. 


26.  . .  .-Sukr.  Distress  from  Chandal,  sorrows,  danger  from  the  king  and  from  weapons, 
dysentery  and  vomiting. 

27.  . .  .-Surya.  Increase  in  landed  property  and  wealth,  satisfaction,  visits  of  friends,  happiness 
all-round. 

28.  . .  .-Candr.  Gains  of  white  garments  etc.  from  the  southern  direction,  success  in  all 
ventures. 

29.  Rahu-Rahu.  Imprisonment,  disease,  danger  of  injuries  from  weapons. 

30.  ...-Guru.  Reverence  everywhere,  acquisition  of  conveyances,  like  elephants  etc.,  gain  of 
wealth. 

31.  ...  -Sani.  Rigorous  imprisonment,  loss  of  enjoyments,  danger  from  enemies,  affliction  with 
rheumatism. 

32.  . .  .-Budh.  Gain  in  all  ventures,  abnormal  gain  through  wife. 

33.  ...-Ketu.  Loss  of  intelligence,  danger  from  enemies,  obstacles,  loss  of  wealth,  quarrels, 
excitement. 

34.  . .  .-Sukr.  Danger  from  a  Yogini,  danger  from  the  king,  loss  of  conveyances,  availability  of 
unpalatable  food,  loss  of  a  wife,  sorrow  in  the  family. 

35.  . .  .-Surya.  Danger  from  enemies,  fevers,  distress  to  children,  fear  of  premature  death, 
negligence. 

36.  ...-Candr.  Excitement,  quarrels,  worries,  loss  of  reputation,  fear,  distress  to  father. 

37.  . .  .-Mangal.  Septic  boil  in  the  anus  (Bhagandhar),  distress,  due  to  a  bite  and  pollution  of 
blood,  loss  of  wealth,  excitement. 

38.  Guru-Guru.  Acquisition  of  gold,  increase  in  wealth  etc. 

39.  . .  .-Sani.  Increase  in  lands,  conveyances  and  grains. 

40.  . .  .-Budh.  Success  in  the  educational  sphere,  acquisition  of  clothes  and  gems,  like  pearls 
etc.,  visits  of  friends. 

41 .  ...  -Ketu.  Danger  from  water  and  thieves. 

42.  ...-Sukr.  Several  kinds  of  learning,  gain  of  gold,  clothes,  ornaments,  well-being  and 
satisfaction. 

43.  . .  .-Surya.  Gain  from  the  king,  friends  and  parents,  reverence  everywhere. 

44.  . .  .-Candr.  No  distress,  gain  of  wealth  and  conveyances,  success  in  ventures. 


45.  . .  .-Mangal.  Danger  from  weapons,  pain  in  anus,  burning  in  the  stomach,  indigestion, 
distress  from  enemies. 

46.  . .  .-Rahu.  Antagonism  with  menials  (Chandaldhi)  and  loss  of  wealth  and  distress  through 
them. 

47.  Sani-Sani.  Physical  distress,  quarrels,  danger  from  menials. 

48.  ...-Budh.  Loss  of  intelligence,  quarrels,  dangers,  anxiety  about  availability  of  food,  loss  of 
wealth,  danger  from  enemy. 

49.  . .  .-Ketu.  Imprisonment  in  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  loss  of  luster,  hunger,  anxiety  and 
agony. 

50.  . .  .-Sukr.  Fulfillment  of  ambitions,  well-being  in  the  family,  success  in  ventures  and  gains 
therefrom. 

51.  ...  -Surya.  Conferment  of  authority  by  the  king,  quarrels  in  the  family,  fevers. 

52.  ...-Candr.  Development  of  intelligence,  inauguration  of  big  a  venture,  loss  of  luster, 
extravagant  expenditure,  association  with  many  women. 

53.  . .  .-Mangal.  Loss  of  valour,  distress  to  son,  danger  from  fire  and  enemy,  distress  from  bile 
and  wind. 

54.  . .  .-Rahu.  Loss  of  wealth,  clothes,  land,  going  away  to  foreign  lands,  fear  of  death. 

55.  . .  .-Guru.  Inability  to  prevent  losses,  caused  by  women,  quarrels,  excitement. 

56.  Budh-Budh.  Gain  of  intelligence,  education,  wealth,  clothes  etc. 

57.  . .  .-Ketu.  Coarse  food,  stomach  troubles,  eye  troubles,  distress  from  bilious  and  blood 
disorders. 

58.  . .  .-Sukr.  Gains  from  a  northern  direction,  loss  of  cattle,  acquisition  of  authority  from 
government. 

59.  ...  -Surya.  Loss  of  splendour  and  distress  through  diseases,  distress  in  the  heart. 

60.  . .  .-Candr.  Marriage,  gain  of  wealth  and  property,  birth  of  a  daughter,  enjoyments  all- 
round. 

61.  . .  .-Mangal.  Religious-mindedness,  increase  in  wealth,  danger  from  fire  and  enemies,  gain 
of  red  clothes,  injury  from  a  weapon. 

62.  . .  .-Rahu.  Quarrels,  danger  from  wife,  or  some  other  woman,  danger  from  the  king. 

63.  . .  .-Guru.  Acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  conferment  of  authority  by  the  king,  reverence  from 
the  king,  education,  intelligence. 


64.  . .  .-Sani.  Bilious  and  windy  troubles,  injuries  to  the  body,  loss  of  wealth. 

65.  Ketu-Ketu.  Sudden  disaster,  going  away  to  foreign  lands,  loss  of  wealth. 

66.  . .  .-Sukr.  Loss  of  wealth  through  a  non-Hindu  king,  eye  troubles,  headache,  loss  of  cattle. 

67.  ...-Surya.  Antagonism  with  friends,  premature  death,  defeat,  exchange  of  arguments. 

68.  ...-Candr.  Loss  of  grains,  physical  distress,  misunderstanding,  dysentery. 

69.  . .  .-Mangal.  Injury  from  weapons,  distress  from  fire,  danger  from  menials  and  enemies. 

70.  . .  .-Rahu.  Danger  from  women  and  enemies,  distress,  caused  by  menials. 

71.  . .  .-Guru.  Loss  of  friends,  wealth  and  garments,  opprobrium  in  the  house,  troubles  from 
everywhere. 

72.  . .  .-Sani.  Death  of  cattle  and  friends,  physical  distress,  very  meagre  gain  of  wealth. 

73.  ...-Budh.  Loss  of  understanding,  excitement,  failure  in  education,  dangers,  failure  in  all 
ventures. 

74.  Sukr-Sukr.  Gains  of  white  clothes,  conveyances,  gems,  like  pearls  etc.,  association  with 
beautiful  damsel. 

75.  . .  .-Surya.  Rheumatic  fever,  headache,  danger  from  the  king  and  enemies  and  meagre  gain 
of  wealth. 

76.  . .  .-Candr.  Birth  of  a  daughter,  gain  of  clothes  etc.  from  the  king,  acquisition  of  authority. 

77.  . .  .-Mangal.  Blood  and  bile  troubles,  quarrels,  many  kinds  of  distresses. 

78.  . .  .-Rahu.  Quarrels  with  wife,  danger,  distress  from  the  king  and  enemies. 

79.  ...-Guru.  Acquisition  of  kingdom,  wealth,  garments,  gems,  ornaments  and  conveyance, 
like  elephants  etc. 

80.  ...-Sani.  Acquisition  of  donkey,  camel,  goat,  iron,  grains,  sesame  seeds,  physical  pains. 

81.  ...-Budh.  Gains  of  wealth,  knowledge,  authority  from  the  king,  gain  of  money,  distributed 
by  others. 

82.  . .  .-Ketu.  Premature  death,  going  away  from  homeland,  gains  of  wealth  at  times. 

Ch.  62.  Effects  of  Sukshmantar  Dashas  in  Pratyantar 
Dashas 


1.  The  Sukshmantar  Dasha  is  arrived  at  by  multiplying  the  periods  of  Pratyantar  Dasha 
separately  for  each  Grah  by  the  Dasha  years  of  that  Grah  and  then  by  dividing  the  product  by 
120. 

2.  Surya-Surya  (Sukshm  Dasha  of  Surya  in  Pratyantar  Dasha  of  Surya).  Going  away  from 
homeland,  danger  of  death,  loss  of  position,  losses  all-round. 

3.  . .  .-Candr.  Devotion  towards  deities  and  Brahmins,  interest  in  pious  deeds,  affectionate 
relations  with  friends. 

4.  ...-Mangal.  Indulgence  in  sinful  deeds,  distress  from  cruel  enemies,  bleeding. 

5.  . .  .-Rahu.  Danger  from  thieves,  fire  and  poison,  defeat  in  war,  religious  inclination. 

6.  . .  .-Guru.  Recognition  by  government,  respected  by  government  employees,  becoming 
favourite  of  the  king. 

I .  ...  -Sani.  Causing  trouble  to  respected  persons  and  Brahmins  by  theft  and  by  other  bold 
deeds,  going  away  from  ones  own  place,  mental  agony. 

8.  . .  .-Budh.  Gains  of  fancy  garments,  association  with  a  beautiful  damsel,  sudden  success  in 
ventures. 

9.  . .  .-Ketu.  Achievement  of  glory  through  wife  and  employees,  loss  of  wealth,  comforts  from 
servants. 

10.  . .  .-Sukr.  Happiness  from  son,  friends  and  wife,  acquisition  of  many  kinds  of  properties. 

I I .  Candr-Candr.  Gain  of  ornaments  and  land,  reverence,  recognition  from  the  king,  anger, 
glory. 

12.  . .  .-Mangal.  Distress,  antagonism  with  the  enemy,  stomach  troubles,  death  of  father, 
troubles,  due  to  imbalance  of  wind  and  bile. 

13.  . .  .-Rahu.  Disharmony  with  friends  and  kinsmen,  going  away  from  homeland,  loss  of 
wealth,  imprisonment. 

14.  ...  -Guru.  Opulence  and  glory  with  royal  symbols,  birth  of  a  son,  gain  of  property, 
enjoyments  all-round. 

15.  . .  .-Sani.  Wrath  of  the  king,  loss  of  wealth  in  business  dealings,  danger  from  thieves  and 
Brahmins. 

16.  . .  .-Budh.  Reverence  from  the  king,  gain  of  wealth,  gain  of  conveyance  from  a  foreign 
land,  increase  in  the  number  of  children. 

17.  . .  .-Ketu.  Loss  in  the  livelihood,  earned  by  sale  etc.,  grains,  medicines,  cattle  etc.,  danger 
from  fire  and  the  sun's  rays  (sun-stroke). 

18.  ...-Sukr.  Marriage,  gain  of  a  kingdom,  land,  garments,  ornaments,  reputation  etc. 


19.  ...-Surya.  Troubles,  losses  in  ventures,  destruction  of  grains  and  cattle,  physical  distress. 

20.  Mangal-Mangal.  Sorrows  on  account  of  loss  of  lands,  epilepsy,  imprisonment, 
unhappiness. 

21.  . .  .-Rahu.  Physical  distress,  danger  from  the  people  (due  to  unpopularity),  loss  of  wife  and 
children,  danger  from  fire. 

22.  . .  .-Guru.  Devotion  towards  deities,  Mantra  Siddhi,  reverence  from  the  people, 
enjoyments. 

23.  . .  .-Sani.  Release  from  imprisonment,  happiness  on  account  of  wealth,  gains  of  clothes  and 
servants. 

24.  . .  .-Budh.  Comforts  of  Chatr,  Chamar  etc.  (receiving  respect,  as  that  of  a  king),  breathing 
troubles. 

25.  ...  -Ketu.  Indulgence  in  undesirable  deeds  at  the  instance  of  others,  one  always  remains 
filthy. 

26.  . .  .-Sukr.  Enjoyment  with  women  of  choice,  gain  of  wealth,  food  etc. 

27.  . .  .-Surya.  Wrath  of  the  king,  distress  through  Brahmins,  failure  in  ventures,  odium  in 
public  (Loka  Nindha). 

28.  . .  .-Candr.  Piousness,  gain  of  wealth,  devotion  towards  deities  and  Brahmins,  danger  from 
diseases. 

29.  Rahu-Rahu.  Tendering  to  create  turbulence  by  people,  lack  of  wisdom  in  performance  of 
duties,  affliction  of  the  mind. 

30.  . .  .-Guru.  Affliction  with  a  chronic  disease,  poverty,  but  revered  by  the  people  and  the 
religious-mindedness. 

31.  ...  -Sani.  Gain  of  wealth  through  unfair  means,  wicked,  or  mean  nature,  performing  other 
person's  duties,  undesirable  association. 

32.  . .  .-Budh.  Increase  in  desires  for  sexual  acts  with  women,  eloquence,  hunger,  physical 
distress. 

33.  ...-Ketu.  Politeness,  loss  of  reputation,  imprisonment,  cold  heartedness,  loss  of  public 
money. 

34.  . .  .-Sukr.  Freedom  from  imprisonment,  gain  of  position  and  wealth. 

35.  . .  .-Surya.  Settling  down  in  foreign  lands,  affliction  with  Gulma,  even  temperament, 
comforts  of  conveyances. 

36.  . .  .-Candr.  Gain  of  gems  (money),  wealth,  education,  attachment  to  prayers,  good  behavior 
and  devotion  towards  deities. 


37.  . .  .-Mangal.  Fleeing  after  defeat,  anger,  imprisonment,  indulgence  in  thefts  and  stealing. 

38.  Guru-Guru.  Banishment  of  sorrows,  increase  in  wealth,  performing  Havan,  devotion  to 
Lord  Shiva,  gains  of  conveyance,  marked  with  royal  symbols. 

39.  ...-Sani.  Obstacles  in  fasting,  agony,  foreign  journeys,  loss  of  wealth,  antagonism  with 
kinsmen. 

40.  . .  .-Budh.  Success  in  education,  increase  in  intelligence,  reverence  from  the  people 
(popularity),  gains  of  wealth,  all  sorts  of  enjoyments  and  comforts  at  home. 

41.  ...-Ketu.  Knowledge,  glory,  learning,  study  of  Shastras,  worship  of  Lord  Shiva,  Havan, 
devotion  toward  preceptor. 

42.  . .  .-Sukr.  Recovery  from  diseases,  enjoyments,  gain  of  wealth,  happiness  from  wife  and 
children. 

43.  . .  .-Surya.  Troubles  of  wind  and  bile,  stomach  pains  through  imbalance  of  phlegm  and 
Rasas. 

44.  . .  .-Candr.  Glory  with  umbrella  with  royal  symbols,  celebrations  on  the  birth  of  a  son, 
distress  in  eyes  and  stomach. 

45.  . .  .-Mangal.  Administration  of  poison  by  wife,  imprisonment,  danger  from  diseases,  going 
away  to  foreign  lands,  confusion  and  misunderstandings. 

46.  . .  .-Rahu.  Danger  from  thieves,  snakes  and  scorpions,  diseases  and  distress. 

47.  Sani-Sani.  Loss  of  wealth,  diseases,  like  rheumatism  etc.,  destruction  of  the  family,  taking 
meals  separately  from  the  family,  full  of  sorrows. 

48.  . .  .-Budh.  Profits  in  business,  progress  in  education,  increase  in  wealth  and  lands. 

49.  . .  .-Ketu.  Turbulence  by  thieves,  leprosy,  loss  of  livelihood,  physical  pains. 

50.  . .  .-Sukr.  Opulence  and  glory,  learning  the  use  of  weapons,  birth  of  a  son,  coronation, 
good  health  and  fulfillment  of  all  ambitions. 

51.  . .  .-Surya.  Wrath  of  the  king,  quarrels  in  the  family,  physical  distress. 

52.  ...-Candr.  Development  of  intelligence,  inauguration  of  a  big  project,  loss  of  luster, 
extravagance,  happiness  from  wife  and  children. 

53.  ...-Mangal.  Loss  of  luster,  excitement,  burning  in  the  stomach,  misunderstanding,  quarrels 
and  wind  and  bile  disorders. 

54.  . .  .-Rahu.  Death  of  parents,  agony,  extravagance,  failure  in  ventures. 

55.  . .  .-Guru.  Acquisition  of  gold  coins,  reverence  from  the  public,  increase  in  wealth  and 
grains,  acquisition  of  Chatr  with  royal  symbols. 


56.  Budh-Budh.  Dawn  of  fortune,  reverence  from  the  king,  increase  in  wealth  and  property 
and  affectionate  relations  with  all. 

57.  . .  .-Ketu.  Danger  from  fire,  agony,  distress  to  wife,  coarse  food  and  immoral  tendencies. 

58.  . .  .-Sukr.  Gain  of  conveyances,  wealth,  grains,  produced  in  water,  good  repute  and 
enjoyments. 

59.  . .  .-Surya.  Injuries,  wrath  of  the  king,  confusion  in  the  mind,  diseases,  loss  of  wealth, 
ridicule  in  public. 

60.  . .  .-Candr.  Good  fortune,  stability  of  mind,  reverence  from  the  king,  gains  of  property, 
visits  of  friends  and  the  preceptor. 

61.  . .  .-Mangal.  Danger  from  fire  and  poison,  idiocy,  poverty,  confusion  of  mind,  excitement. 

62.  . .  .-Rahu.  Danger  from  fire  and  snakes  and  the  victory  over  an  enemy  (with  difficulty), 
opprobrium  from  goblins  (evil,  mischievous  spirit). 

63.  . .  .-Guru.  Construction  of  a  house,  interest  in  charities,  comforts  and  enjoyments,  increase 
in  opulence,  gain  of  wealth  from  the  king. 

64.  . .  .-Sani.  Profits  in  business,  progress  in  education  and  increase  in  wealth,  marriage, 
circumambience  of  comprehensiveness. 

65.  Ketu-Ketu.  Happiness  from  wife  and  children,  physical  troubles,  poverty,  begging. 

66.  . .  .-Sukr.  Freedom  from  diseases,  gains  of  wealth,  devotion  towards  Brahmins  and  the 
preceptor,  union  with  members  of  the  family. 

67.  . .  .-Surya.  Quarrels,  loss  of  land,  residence  in  foreign  lands,  disaster  upon  friends. 

68.  . .  .-Candr.  Promotion  in  service,  victory  in  war,  good  reputation  in  public. 

69.  . .  .-Mangal.  Danger  of  falling  down  from  a  horse  etc.,  distress  from  thieves  and  the 
wicked,  suffering  from  Gulma  and  headache. 

70.  . .  .-Rahu.  Destruction  of  wife,  father  etc.,  defamation,  due  to  association  with  a  wicked 
woman,  vomiting,  blood  pollution,  bilious  diseases. 

71.  . .  .-Guru.  Antagonism  with  the  enemy,  increase  in  property  and  opulence,  distress,  due  to 
losses  in  cattle,  wealth  and  agricultural  production. 

72.  . .  .-Sani.  Imaginary  distress,  little  comfort,  fasting,  antagonism  with  wife,  indulgence  in 
falsehood. 

73.  . .  .-Budh.  Union  and  separation  from  many  kinds  of  people,  distress  to  the  enemy, 
increase  in  wealth  and  property. 


74.  Sukr-Sukr.  Destruction  of  enemies,  enjoyments,  construction  of  temples  of  Lord  Shiva 
etc.  and  reservoirs. 

75.  . .  .-Surya.  Agony  in  mind  and  heart,  confusion  of  mind,  wanderings,  both  losses  and  gains 
at  different  times. 

76.  . .  .-Candr.  Sound  health,  increase  in  wealth,  success  in  ventures  through  business  dealings, 
progress  in  education  and  increase  of  intelligence. 

77.  . .  .-Mangal.  Idiocy,  danger  from  an  enemy,  going  away  from  one's  homeland,  danger 
from  diseases. 

78.  . .  .-Rahu.  Danger  from  fire  and  snakes,  destruction  of  kinsmen,  resignation  from  position 
(service  etc.). 

79.  . .  .-Guru.  Success  in  ventures,  increase  in  wealth  and  agricultural  production,  abnormal 
profits  from  purchase  and  sale  business. 

80.  ...-Sani.  Distress  from  an  enemy,  sorrows,  destruction  of  cattle,  loss  of  persons,  belonging 
to  the  Gotra  of  the  native  and  elders  (preceptors). 

81.  . .  .-Budh.  Increase  in  wealth  with  the  assistance  of  kinsmen,  gain  of  wealth  through 
business,  happiness  from  wife  and  children. 

82.  . .  .-Ketu.  Danger  from  fire,  distress  from  diseases,  distress  in  mouth,  eyes  and  forehead, 
loss  of  accumulated  wealth,  mental  agony. 

Ch.  63.  Effects  of  Prana  Dashas  in  Sukshma  Dashas 

1 .  If  we  multiply  the  Sukshma  Dasha  spans  by  the  Dasha  years  of  each  Grah  and  divide  the 
product  by  120,  we  will  get  the  Prana  Dasha. 

(2)  Surya-Surya.  Interest  in  unnatural  sexual  intercourse,  danger  from  thieves,  fire  and  the 
king,  physical  distress. 

3.  ...-Candr.  Enjoyments,  availability  of  good  food,  development  of  intelligence,  opulence 
and  glory,  like  that  of  a  king,  by  the  beneficence  of  generous  people. 

4.  . .  .-Mangal.  Antagonism  with  the  king  with  the  connivance  of  others,  dangers  and  great 
losses. 

5.  . .  .-Rahu.  Hunger,  danger  from  poison,  loss  of  wealth,  as  a  result  of  punishment  by  the 
king. 

6.  . .  .-Guru.  Success  in  many  educational  spheres,  gain  of  wealth,  success  in  ventures,  as  a 
result  of  the  exchange  of  visits  with  the  king  and  Brahmins. 

7.  ...-Sani.  Imprisonment,  death,  excitement,  obstacles  and  losses  in  ventures. 


8.  . .  .-Budh.  Feeding  from  the  kings  kitchen,  acquisition  of  Chatr  and  Chamar  with  royal 
symbols,  attainment  of  the  position  of  a  high  dignitary  in  government. 

9.  . .  .-Ketu.  Loss  of  wealth,  due  to  quarrels  with  the  preceptor  (elders),  wife  and  kinsmen. 

10.  . .  .-Sukr.  Recognition,  or  reverence  from  the  king,  increase  in  wealth,  happiness  from  wife 
and  children,  enjoyments  from  eating  and  drinking. 

11.  Candr-Candr.  Happiness  from  wife  and  children,  gain  of  wealth  and  clothes,  Yog  Sidhi. 

12.  ...-Mangal.  Consumption,  leprosy,  destruction  of  kinsmen,  bleeding,  creation  of 
turbulence  by  friends  and  goblins. 

13.  . .  .-Rahu.  Danger  from  snakes,  creation  of  turbulance  by  evil  spirits,  weakness  of  eyesight, 
confusion  of  mind. 

14.  ...-Guru.  Growth  of  religious-mindedness,  forgiveness,  devotion  towards  deities  and 
Brahmins,  good  fortune,  meeting  with  near  and  dear  ones. 

15.  . .  .-Sani.  Unexpected  and  sudden  physical  distress,  creation  of  troubles  by  enemies, 
weakness  of  eyesight,  gain  of  wealth. 

16.  ...  -Budh.  Gift  of  Chamar  and  Chatr  by  the  king,  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  even- 
mindedness  in  people. 

17.  . .  .-Ketu.  Danger  from  weapons,  from  fire,  from  an  enemy  and  from  poison,  stomach 
troubles,  separation  from  wife  and  children. 

18.  . .  .-Sukr.  Acquisition  of  friends  and  wife,  gain  of  wealth  from  foreign  lands,  all  kinds  of 
enjoyments. 

19.  . .  .-Surya.  Brutality,  increase  in  anger,  fear  of  death,  agony,  going  away  from  the 
homeland,  dangers. 

20.  Mangal -Mangal.  Quarrels  with  the  enemy,  imprisonment,  bilious  and  blood  pollution 
troubles. 

21.  . .  .-Rahu.  Separation  from  wife  and  children,  distress,  as  a  result  of  oppression  by 
kinsmen,  fear  of  death,  poison. 

22.  . .  .-Guru.  Devotion  towards  deities,  gain  of  wealth,  competence  in  Mantra  rituals. 

23.  . .  .-Sani.  Danger  from  fire,  death,  loss  of  wealth,  loss  of  position,  but  good  relations  with 
kinsmen. 

24.  ...-Budh.  Gains  of  splendid  garments,  ornaments,  marriage. 

25.  . .  .-Ketu.  Fear  of  falling  down  from  a  high  place,  eye  troubles,  danger  from  snakes,  loss  of 
reputation. 


26.  . .  .-Sukr.  Gain  of  wealth,  reverence  amongst  people,  enjoyment  of  many  kinds  of  luxuries. 

27.  ...-Surya.  Fevers,  lunacy,  loss  of  wealth,  wrath  of  the  king,  poverty. 

28.  . .  .-Candr.  Comforts  of  good  food  and  garments,  distress  from  heat  and  cold. 

29.  Rahu-Rahu.  Loss  of  taste  in  eating,  danger  from  poison,  loss  of  wealth  through  rashness. 

30.  ...-Guru.  Physical  well-being,  fearlessness,  gain  of  conveyance  and  quarrels  with  menials. 

31.  ...  -Sani.  Danger  from  fire,  diseases,  loss  of  wealth  through  menials,  imprisonment. 

32.  . .  .-Budh.  Devotion  towards  the  preceptor  and  increase  of  wealth  through  his  beneficence, 
good  qualities  and  well  cultured. 

33.  . .  .-Ketu.  Antagonism  with  wife  and  children,  going  away  from  home,  loss  of  wealth 
through  rashness. 

34.  ...-Sukr.  Acquisition  of  Chatr,  Chamar,  conveyances  etc.,  success  in  all  ventures,  worship 
of  Lord  Shiva,  construction  of  a  house. 

35.  . .  .-Surya.  Affliction  with  piles,  wrath  of  the  king,  loss  of  cattle. 

36.  . .  .-Candr.  Development  of  mental  powers  and  intelligence,  popularity,  visits  of 
preceptors,  danger  of  committing  sins. 

37.  . .  .-Mangal.  Dangers  from  menials  and  fire,  loss  of  position,  disaster,  filthiness  and 
meanness. 

38.  Guru-Guru.  Happiness,  increase  in  wealth,  performance  of  Havan,  worship  of  Lord  Shiva, 
acquisition  of  Chatr  and  conveyances. 

39.  . .  .-Sani.  Failure  in  fasting,  unhappiness,  going  away  to  foreign  lands,  loss  of  wealth, 
antagonism  with  kinsmen. 

40.  . .  .-Budh.  Progress  in  education,  increase  in  intelligence,  happiness  to  wife  and  children, 
popularity,  gain  of  wealth. 

41.  ...-Ketu.  Opulence  and  glory,  learnedness,  gain  of  knowledge  of  Shastras,  worship  of 
Lord  Shiva,  performance  of  Havan,  devotion  towards  preceptor. 

42.  . .  .-Sukr.  Freedom  from  diseases,  enjoyments,  increase  in  wealth,  happiness  from  wife  and 
children. 

43.  . .  .-Surya.  Disorders  of  wind,  bile  and  phlegm,  pains,  due  to  disorders  of  juices  in  the 
body. 

44.  ...  -Candr.  Acquisition  of  Chatr  with  royal  symbol,  opulence  and  glory,  increase  in 
children,  eye  and  stomach  troubles. 


45.  . .  .-Mangal.  Danger  of  administration  of  poison  by  wife,  imprisonment,  foreign  journeys, 
confusion  of  mind. 

46.  . .  .-Rahu.  Distress  from  diseases,  troubles  from  thieves,  danger  from  snakes,  scorpions  etc. 

47.  Sani-Sani:  Loss  of  luster,  due  to  fevers,  leprosy,  stomach  troubles,  danger  of  death  from 
fire. 

48.  . .  .-Budh.  Gain  of  wealth  and  grains,  profits  in  business,  reverence,  devotion  towards 
deities  and  Brahmins. 

49.  . .  .-Ketu.  Death4ike  distress,  creation  of  turbulence  by  evil  spirits,  insult  from  a  woman, 
other  than  one's  wife. 

50.  . .  .-Sukr.  Enjoyments  through  wealth,  son  and  beneficence  of  the  king,  performance  of 
Havanas,  marriage  etc. 

51.  ...  -Surya.  Troubles  in  the  eyes  and  forehead,  danger  from  snakes  and  enemies,  loss  of 
wealth,  distress. 

52.  . .  .-Candr.  Sound  health,  birth  of  a  son,  relief,  thriving  strength,  devotion  towards  deities 
and  Brahmins. 

53 .  ...  -Mangal.  Affliction  with  Gulma,  danger  from  enemy,  danger  of  death  during  hunting, 
danger  from  snakes,  from  fire  and  from  poison. 

54.  . .  .-Rahu.  Going  away  from  the  homeland,  danger  from  the  king,  bewitchment,  taking  of 
poison,  troubles  from  wind  and  bile. 

55.  . .  .-Guru.  Attainment  of  the  position  of  a  Commander  in  the  Army,  gain  of  land, 
association  with  ascetics,  reverence  from  the  king. 

56.  Budh-Budh.  Increase  in  enjoyments,  wealth  and  religious-mindedness,  even-mindedness 
in  all  living  beings. 

57.  . .  .-Ketu.  Danger  from  thieves,  from  fire  and  from  poison,  death-like  suffering. 

58.  . .  .-Sukr.  Supremacy  over  others,  increase  in  wealth,  reputation  and  religious-mindedness, 
devotion  to  Lord  Shiva,  happiness  from  son. 

59.  . .  .-Surya.  Agony,  fevers,  lunacy,  affectionate  relations  with  wife  and  kinsmen,  receipt  of 
stolen  property. 

60.  . .  .-Candr.  Happiness  from  wife,  birth  of  a  daughter,  gain  of  wealth  and  enjoyments  all- 
round. 

61.  . .  .-Mangal.  Tendency  to  indulge  in  nefarious  activities,  pain  in  eyes,  teeth  and  stomach, 
piles,  danger  from  death. 


62.  . .  .-Rahu.  Gain  of  clothes,  ornaments  and  wealth,  separation  from  one's  own  people, 
antagonism  with  Brahmins,  delirium. 

63.  . .  .-Guru.  Sublimately,  progress  in  education,  increase  in  wealth  and  good  qualities,  profits 
in  business. 

64.  . .  .-Sani.  Danger  of  death  from  thieves,  poverty,  beggary. 

65.  Ketu-Ketu.  Danger  of  fall  from  a  conveyance,  quarrels  with  the  enemy,  committing  a 
murder  inadvertently. 

66.  ...-Sukr.  Gain  of  land  and  conveyance,  happiness,  destruction  of  enemy,  increase  in  cattle 
wealth. 

67.  . .  .-Surya.  Danger  from  fire  and  enemy,  loss  of  wealth,  mental  agony,  death-like  suffering. 

68.  . .  .-Candr.  Devotion  towards  deities  and  Brahmin,  journeys  to  distant  places,  gain  of 
wealth  and  happiness,  eye  and  ear  troubles. 

69.  . .  .-Mangal.  Bilious  troubles,  enlargement  of  veins,  delirium,  antagonism  with  kinsmen. 

70.  . .  .-Rahu.  Antagonism  with  son  and  wife,  going  away  from  home,  loss  in  ventures,  due  to 
rashness. 

71.  . .  .-Guru.  Injuries  from  weapons,  wounds,  heart  disease,  separation  from  wife  and 
children. 

72.  . .  .-Sani.  Confusion  of  mind,  tendencies  towards  nefarious  deeds,  imprisonment  on 
account  of  addictions  (in  drugs  etc.),  distress. 

73.  ...-Budh.  Enjoyments  of  bed,  perfumery,  ornaments  and  sandal,  good  food  and 
availability  of  all  kinds  of  comforts. 

74.  Sukr-Sukr.  Learning,  devotion  to  deities,  satisfaction,  gain  of  wealth,  increase  in  the 
number  of  children. 

75.  . .  .-Surya.  Good  reputation  in  public,  loss  of  happiness  in  respect  of  children,  heat 
troubles. 

76.  . .  .-Candr.  Devotion  towards  deities,  competence,  relief  by  the  application  of  Mantras, 
increase  in  wealth  and  fortune. 

77.  . .  .-Mangal.  Fevers,  wounds,  ringworms,  itches,  devotion  towards  deities  and  Brahmins. 

78.  . .  .-Rahu.  Distress  from  an  enemy,  eye  and  stomach  troubles,  antagonism  with  friends. 

79.  . .  .-Guru.  Good  longevity,  sound  health,  happiness  from  wealth,  wife  and  children, 
acquisition  of  Chatr  and  conveyances. 


80.  . .  .-Sani.  Danger  from  the  king,  loss  of  happiness,  critical  disease,  controversy  with 
menials. 

81.  . .  .-Budh.  Satisfaction,  reverence  from  the  king,  gains  of  land  and  wealth  from  many 
directions,  increase  in  enthusiasm. 

82.  . .  .-Ketu.  Loss  of  life,  wealth  and  reputation,  only  some  money  is  left  for  charities  and 
sustenance. 

Ch.  64.  Effects  of  Antar  Dashas  in  the  Kala  Chakr 

1.  Maharishi  Parashar  said.  Now  I  am  going  to  describe  to  you  the  effects  of  Antar  Dashas  in 
the  Kala  Chakr  Dasha,  as  related  by  Lord  Shiva  to  the  Goddess  Parvati. 

2.  Dasha  of  Mesh  Ahs.  There  will  be  wounds  and  fever  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal  in  the 
Dasha  of  Mesh  Ahs.  In  the  same  Dasha  and  Antar  Dasha  of  the  Rasis,  owned  by  Budh,  Sukr, 
Candr  and  Guru,  all  kinds  of  happiness  will  be  enjoyed.  Danger  from  an  enemy  will  be 
experienced  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Surya. 

3-5.  Dasha  of  Vrishabh  Ahs.  Effects,  like  quarrels  and  diseases,  will  be  experienced  in  Antar 
Dasha  of  Sani.  There  will  be  gains  of  education  and  physical  felicity  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of 
Guru,  going  away  from  home,  death,  or  distress  from  fevers  in  the  Antar  Dasha  of  Mangal 
and  gains  of  garments,  happy  association  with  women  in  the  Antar  Dashas  of  the  Rasis, 
owned  by  Sukr  and  Budh.  Danger  from  the  king  and  violent  animals  may  be  expected  in  the 
Antar  Dasha  of  Rasi,  owned  by  Surya. 

6-10.  Dasha  of  Mithun  Ahs.  The  effects  in  the  Antar  Dashas  of  the  Rasis  concerned  will  be,  as 
follows.  Sukr  -  gain  of  wealth  and  garments.  Mangal  -  death  of  parents,  danger,  fever,  wounds 
and  travels  to  distant  places.  Guru  -  increase  in  intelligence,  success  in  education,  opulence 
and  glory,  popularity  and  affection  towards  others.  Sani  -  foreign  journeys,  diseases,  fear  of 
death,  loss  of  wealth  and  kinsmen.  Budh  -  success  in  education,  gains  of  garments  etc., 
happiness  from  wife  and  children  and  reverence  from  all  quarters. 

11-16.  Dasha  of  Kark  Ahs.  The  effects  in  the  various  Antar  Dashas  of  the  Rasis  concerned 
will  be,  as  follows.  Candr  -  happiness  from  wife  and  children,  gain  of  wealth  and  reverence 
from  the  public.  Surya  -  danger  from  enemies,  animals  and  the  royal  family,  mental  agony 
and  fear  of  diseases.  Budh  and  Sukr  -  happiness  from  wife,  children  and  friends,  increase  in 
wealth,  popularity  and  name  and  fame.  Mangal  -  danger  from  poison,  weapons  and  diseases, 
like  fever.  Guru  -  gains  of  wealth,  physical  felicity,  honours  from  the  king.  Sani  -  rheumatism, 
danger  from  snakes  and  scorpions  and  distress  of  all  kinds. 

17-21.  Dasha  of  Simh  Ahs.  . . .  Mangal  -  diseases  of  the  mouth,  bilious  fever  and  danger  from 
weapon.  Budh  and  Sukr  -  gain  of  clothes,  happiness  from  wife  and  children.  Candr  -  danger 
from  fall  from  some  height,  meagre  gains  of  wealth,  foreign  journeys.  Surya  -  danger  from 
enemies,  fevers,  loss  of  wisdom,  fear  of  death.  Guru  -  gains  of  wealth  and  grains,  beneficence 
of  the  king  and  Brahmins,  progress  in  education. 

22-26.  Dasha  of  Kanya  Ahs.  . . .  Sani  -  many  kinds  of  troubles,  travels  to  distant  places,  fevers, 
distress  from  hunger.  Guru  -  gains  of  wealth  through  the  beneficence  of  the  king,  arrival  of 
friends  and  kinsmen  and  success  in  education.  Mangal  -  bilious  fever,  travels  to  distant  places, 


danger  from  fire  and  from  weapons.  Budh,  Sukr  and  Candr  -  gains  of  wealth  through  sons  and 
employees,  many  enjoyments.  Surya  -  travel  to  distant  lands,  danger  from  diseases,  quarrels 
with  kinsmen,  danger  of  assaults  by  weapons. 

27-3 1 .  Dasha  of  Tula  Ahs.  . . .  Sukr  -  wisdom,  comforts,  happiness  from  wife  and  children  and 
from  wealth,  garments  etc.  Mangal  -  distress  to  father,  enmity  with  friends,  danger  from 
disease  of  forehead,  fevers,  poison,  weapons  etc.  Guru  -  gain  of  wealth,  acquisition  of  a 
kingdom,  performance  of  religious  rites,  honours  from  the  king  and  happiness  all-round.  Sani 
-  travels  to  distant  places,  critical  diseases,  loss  in  the  agricultural  sphere,  danger  from 
enemies.  Budh  -  birth  of  a  son,  gain  of  wealth,  happiness  from  one's  wife,  joy,  dawn  of 
fortune. 

32-33.  Dasha  of  Vrischik  Ahs.  The  following  effects  will  be  experienced  in  the  Antar  Dashas 
of  the  Rasis  concerned.  Candr,  Budh  and  Sukr  -  gain  of  wealth  and  grains  in  different  ways, 
freedom  from  diseases,  enjoyments  of  many  kinds.  Surya  -  danger  from  enemies,  loss  of 
wealth,  distress  to  father,  danger  from  wild  and  violent  animals.  Mangal  -  troubles  from  wind 
and  bile,  wounds,  danger  from  fire  and  from  weapons.  Guru  -  gains  of  wealth,  grains,,  and 
gems,  devotion  towards  deities  and  Brahmins,  beneficence  of  the  king.  Sani  -  loss  of  wealth, 
separation  from  kinsmen,  mental  anxiety,  danger  from  enemies,  diseases. 

34-40.  Dasha  of  Dhanu  Ahs.  The  following  effects  will  be  derived  in  the  various  Antar 
Dashas  of  the  Rasis,  owned  by. . .  Mangal  -  heart  burn,  fevers,  cold,  diseases  of  the  mouth, 
many  kinds  of  troubles.  Sukr,  Budh  and  Candr  -  increase  in  wealth  and  property  and  fortune, 
progress  in  education,  destruction  of  enemies,  happiness  from  the  king.  Surya  -  loss  of  wife 
and  wealth,  quarrels,  danger  from  the  king,  travels  to  distant  lands.  Guru  -  charily,  self- 
mortifications,  honours  from  the  king,  increase  in  religious-mindedness,  happiness  from  wife, 
gain  of  wealth. 

41-44.  Dasha  of  Makar  Ahs.  The  following  effects  will  be  experienced  in  the  various  Antar 
Dashas  of  the  Rasis,  owned  by. . .  Sani  -  wrath  of  Brahmins,  deities  and  the  king,  loss  of 
kinsmen,  abandonment  of  the  homeland.  Sukr,  Budh,  Candr  and  Guru  -  devotion  towards 
deities,  self-mortification,  honours  from  the  government.  Mangal  -  disease  of  the  forehead, 
assaults  on  hands  and  feet,  danger  from  dysentery,  blood  pollution  and  bilious  troubles.  Sani  - 
loss  of  father  and  kinsmen,  fevers,  danger  from  the  king  and  the  enemies. 

45-49.  Dasha  of  Kumbh  Ahs.  . . .  Sukr  -  many  kinds  of  educational  attainments,  gains  of 
property,  happiness  from  wife  and  children,  sound  health  and  increase  in  wealth.  Mangal  - 
fevers,  danger  from  fire  and  from  enemies,  distress  from  enemies  and  mental  agony.  Sani  - 
danger  of  troubles  from  wind,  bile  and  phlegm,  quarrels,  foreign  journey,  danger  of  suffering 
from  tuberculosis.  Guru  -  freedom  from  ill  health,  happiness,  honours  from  the  king  and  joy. 
Budh  -  happiness  from  wife,  children  and  wealth,  joy,  increase  in  good  fortune. 

50-55.  Dasha  of  Meen  Ahs.  . . .  Candr  -  increase  in  wisdom  and  educational  attainments, 
happiness  from  wife,  freedom  from  disease,  association  with  friends,  joy  and  happiness. 
Surya  -  quarrels  with  kinsmen,  danger  from  thieves,  mental  agony,  loss  of  position.  Budh  and 
Sukr  -  victory  in  war,  birth  of  a  son,  gains  of  land  and  cattle,  increase  in  wealth.  Mangal  - 
bilious  troubles,  dissension  with  members  of  the  family,  danger  from  enemies.  Guru  -  gain  of 
wealth  and  grains,  happiness  from  wife,  honours  from  the  king,  name  and  fame.  Sani  -  loss  of 
wealth,  mental  agony,  abandonment  of  the  homeland  on  account  of  associations  with 
prostitutes. 


56-58.  Maharishi  Parashar  said  to  Maitreya.  O  Brahmin!  The  effects  of  Antar  Dashas  in  the 
Kala  Chakr,  which  have  been  described  above,  are  based  on  Savya  Chakr.  The  effects  of 
Antar  Dashas  in  the  Dashas  of  the  Rasis  in  the  Apsavya  Chakr  have  to  be  assessed,  after 
taking  into  account  the  benefic  and  malefic  natures  of  the  Lords  of  the  Rasis.  People  have  to 
enjoy  the  good,  or  suffer  the  bad  results,  according  to  their  good,  or  bad  actions  in  the 
previous  births.  Everybody  suffers,  or  enjoys  accordingly.  The  peculiarity  in  this  respect  is, 
that  inauspicious  results  have  been  ascribed  to  malefics.  But,  if  during  the  Antar  Dasha  the 
Grah  concerned  is  a  friend  of  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  the  results  of  the  Antar  Dasha  will  be 
favourable.  If  the  Grah  concerned  is  a  benefic,  but  an  enemy  of  the  Lord  of  the  Dasha,  his 
Antar  Dasha  effects  will  not  prove  favourable.  This  is  how  the  Antar  Dasha  effects  have  to  be 
analyzed  and  conclusions  arrived  at. 

Ch.  65.  Effects  of  Dashas  of  Rasis  in  the  Ansas  of  the 
Various  Rasis 

1-3.  The  following  will  be  the  effects  in  the  Dashas  of  Rasis  in  Mesh  Ahs.  Mesh  -  distress 
from  diseases,  caused  by  blood  pollution,  Vrishabh  -  increase  in  grain  production,  Mithun  - 
dawn  of  knowledge  (Gyanodaya),  Kark  -  increase  in  wealth,  Simh  -  danger  from  enemies, 
Kanya  -  happiness  from  wife,  Tula  -  ministership,  Vrischik  -  danger  of  death,  Dhanu  -  gains 
of  wealth. 

4-51/2.  . . .  Vrishabh  Ahs.  Makar  -  tendency  to  indulge  in  sinful  actions,  Kumbh  -  profits  in 
business,  Meen  -  success  in  all  ventures,  Vrischik  -  danger  from  fire,  Tula  -  honours  from  the 
king,  Kanya  -  danger  from  enemies,  Kark  -  distress  to  wife,  Simh  -  eye  troubles,  Mithun  - 
danger  from  poison. 

6-8.  . . .  Mithun  Ahs.  Vrishabh  -  gains  of  wealth,  Mesh  -  fever,  Meen  -  affectionate  relations 
with  maternal  uncle,  Kumbh  -  increase  in  enemies,  Makar  -  danger  from  thieves,  Dhanu  - 
progress  in  education,  Mesh  -  assaults  from  enemies,  Vrishabh  -  quarrels,  Mithun  -  happiness. 

9-1 OV2.  . . .  Kark  Ahs.  Kark  -  enjoyments,  Simh  -  danger  from  the  king,  Kanya  -  happiness 
from  kinsmen,  Tula  -  good  reputation,  Vrischik  -  distress  from  father,  Dhanu  -  gain  of 
knowledge  and  wealth,  Makar  -  disgrace  in  public,  Kumbh  -  loss  in  business,  Meen  -  travels 
to  distant  lands. 

11-13.  ...  in  Simh  Ahs.  Vrischik  -  quarrels,  distress,  Tula  -  gain  of  wealth,  happiness,  Kanya  - 
increase  in  wealth  and  grains,  Kark  -  danger  from  animals,  Simh  -  both  happiness  and 
sorrows,  Mithun  -  increase  in  enemies,  Vrishabh  -  gain  of  property,  happiness,  Mesh  - 
distress,  Meen  -  long  journey. 

14-1 5  V2.  ...  Kanya  Ahs.  Kumbh  -  gain  of  wealth,  Makar  -  increase  in  wealth,  Dhanu  - 
happiness  from  brothers,  Mesh  -  happiness  from  mother,  Vrishabh  -  happiness  from  sons, 
Mithun  -  danger  from  enemies,  Kark  -  affectionate  relation  with  wife,  Simh  -  increase  in  ill 
health,  Kanya  -  birth  of  a  son. 

16-18.  . . .  Tula  Ahs.  Tula  -  gain  of  wealth,  Vrischik  -  happiness  from  brothers,  Dhanu  - 
happiness  from  brothers  and  uncles,  Makar  -  distress  to  mother,  Kumbh  -  profits  in  business, 
Meen  -  gain  of  property,  happiness,  Vrischik  -  distress  to  wife,  Tula  -  danger  from  water, 
Kanya  -  increase  in  property  and  happiness. 


19-20Vi  . . .  Vrischik  Ans.  Kark  -  loss  of  wealth,  Simh  -  danger  from  government,  Mithun  - 
gain  of  lands,  Vrishabh  -  increase  in  wealth,  Mesh  -  distress  on  account  of  blood  pollution, 
Meen  -  happiness,  Kumbh  -  profits  in  business,  Makar  -  loss  of  wealth,  Dhanu  -  gain  of 
property,  happiness. 

21-23.  ...  Dhanu  Ans.  Mesh  -  gain  of  wealth,  Vrishabh  -  gain  of  lands,  Mithun  -  success  in  all 
ventures,  Kark  -  gain  of  property,  happiness,  Simh  -  all  comforts,  Kanya  -  quarrels,  Tula  - 
profits  in  business,  Vrischik  -  danger  from  diseases,  Dhanu  -  happiness  to  sons. 

24-25/4.  . . .  Makar  Ans.  Makar  -  birth  of  a  son,  Kumbh  -  increase  in  wealth,  Meen  -  well- 
being,  Vrischik  -  danger  from  animals,  Tula  -  gain  of  wealth,  Kanya  -  danger  from  enemies, 
Kark  -  gain  of  wealth,  Simh  -  danger  from  enemies,  Mithun  -  danger  from  poison. 

26-28.  . . .  Kumbh  Ans.  Vrishabh  -  increase  in  wealth,  Mesh  -  eye  troubles,  Meen  -  travels  to 
distant  lands,  Kumbh  -  increase  in  wealth,  Makar  -  success  in  all  ventures,  Dhanu  -  increase  in 
knowledge  and  learning,  Mesh  -  loss  of  happiness,  Vrishabh  -  danger  of  death,  Mithun  -  gains 
of  property,  happiness. 

29-3 1 .  . . .  Meen  Ans.  Kark  -  increase  in  wealth,  Simh  -  assistance  from  the  king,  Kanya  - 
increase  in  wealth  and  grains,  Tula  -  profits  in  business,  Vrischik  -  distress  from  fever,  Dhanu 
-  increase  in  knowledge  and  wealth,  Makar  -  antagonism  with  wife,  Kumbh  -  danger  from 
water,  Meen  -  all  kinds  of  enjoyments. 

32.  There  is  no  doubt,  that  observance  of  remedial  measures  in  the  form  of  prescribed 
Maharishi  Yagyas  destroys  the  evil  effects  of  the  inauspicious  Dashas  and  yield  happiness. 

Ch.  66.  AshtakaVarg 

1-4.  Maitreya  said:  "O  Venerable  Sage!  You  have  described  many  kinds  of  effects,  relating  to 
the  Grahas  and  Bhavas,  after  incorporating  the  views  of  many  sages  and  Acharyas,  but  it  is 
not  possible  to  say  with  certainty,  if  a  particular  effect  is  quite  correct,  after  considering  the 
contradictions  in  the  effects  by  the  movements  of  the  various  Grahas.  As  because  of  sinful 
deeds,  committed  by  people  in  Kaliyuga,  their  minds  have  become  blunt,  be  kind  enough  to 
describe  a  method,  which  would  enable  even  the  shallow  minded  persons  to  ascertain  their 
happiness  and  sorrows  and  determine  their  longevity  on  the  basis  of  the  positions  of  the 
Grahas  in  transit." 

5-6.  The  sage  replied:  "O  Brahmin!  You  have  put  a  very  intelligent  question.  I  will  now 
describe  the  Shastra  for  the  benefit  of  all,  the  Shastra,  in  which  there  will  be  no  contradictions 
in  judging  the  effects  of  happiness  and  sorrows  and  for  determination  of  the  longevity.  You 
now  listen  to  me  carefully. 

7-11.  If  the  12  Bhavas,  including  Lagn,  are  occupied  by,  or  aspected  by  benefic  Grahas,  they 
yield  auspicious  results,  according  to  their  characteristics,  but  this  happens,  where  the  Grahas 
concerned  are  in  their  exaltation  Rasi,  own  Rasi,  or  posited  in  a  benefic  Bhava.  There  will  be 
no  good  effects,  if  such  Grahas  are  in  depression,  or  posited  in  an  inauspicious  Bhava. 
Similarly  the  Bhavas,  associated  with,  or  aspected  by  malefics  in  depression,  or  posited  in 
malefic  Bhavas,  yield  adverse  results,  according  to  their  characteristics.  If  such  Grahas  be  in 
their  exaltation  Rasi,  the  effects  will  not  be  adverse.  This  is  how  the  general  effects  have  been 
described  by  the  Daivajnas.  I  have  only  repeated  those  effects.  The  main  purposes  of  this 


Jyotish  Shastra  are  to  determine  the  longevity  and  joys  and  sorrows  of  the  people,  but  because 
the  movements  of  the  Grahas  are  so  subtle,  even  sages,  like  Vashista  and  Brihaspati,  have  not 
been  able  to  be  quite  definite  in  this  respect.  Then  how  can  a  common  man,  particularly  in 
Kaliyuga,  do  so. 

12.  There  are  two  divisions,  or  parts  of  the  Jyotish  Shastra,  namely  general  and  particular.  I 
have  already  dealt  with  the  general  part.  I  now  come  to  the  other  part,  which  deals  with  this 
subject  in  particular. 

13-15.  As  the  effects  of  the  twelve  Bhavas  are  judged  from  Lagn  and  Candr,  effects  of  the 
twelve  Bhavas  and  the  various  Grahas  are  judged  in  the  same  manner.  Therefore  the 
inauspicious  places  from  the  seven  Grahas,  named,  as  Karan,  beginning  from  Surya  and  Lagn 
(total  8),  should  be  marked  by  dots  (Bindus)  and  auspicious  places,  named,  as  Sthan,  by  small 
vertical  lines  (Rekhas)  and  on  the  basis  of  their  assessment  should  the  judgment  of  the 
horoscope  and  predictions  be  made." 

Notes.  The  above  arrangement  is  known,  as  AshtakaVarg.  The  meaning  of  AshtakaVarg  is 
literally  the  group  of  eight  things.  In  other  words  it  is  the  combination  of  the  good  and  bad 
positions  of  a  Grah  with  reference  to  the  seven  Grahas  and  Lagn.  So  it  is  the  combination  of 
the  benefic  and  malefic  marks  (the  Rekhas  and  the  Bindus)  in  a  planet's  chart  with  reference 
to  the  position  of  the  eight  Grahas  (here  Lagn  is  to  be  treated,  as  a  Grah). 

16.  Five  Grahas  in  1st,  2nd,  8th,  3rd  and  the  12th  Bhavas  from  Surya  are  Karanprad  (dot 
significators).  Similarly  four  Grahas  in  the  7th  and  4th,  three  Grahas  in  the  6th  and  9th,  six 
Grahas  in  the  5th,  2  Grahas  in  the  10th  and  one  Grah  in  the  1 1th  are  dot  significators. 

17-19.  Thus  Lagn,  Candr,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Budh  in  the  1st,  2nd  and  8th  from  Surya;  Surya, 
Mangal,  Sani,  Candr  and  Guru  in  the  12th;  Budh,  Candr,  Sukr,  Guru  in  the  4th;  Lagn,  Candr, 
Sukr  in  the  9th;  Surya,  Sani  and  Mangal  in  the  6th;  Lagn,  Budh,  Guru  and  Candr  in  the  7th; 
Sukr  in  the  1 1th;  Surya,  Sani,  Sukr,  Guru  and  Mangal  in  the  3rd;  Guru  and  Sukr  in  the  10th; 
Surya,  Sani,  Candr,  Lagn  Mangal  and  Sukr  in  the  5th  are  Karanprad,  or  dot  indicators. 

20-22.  In  Candr' s  AshtakaVarg  6  Grahas  in  the  9th  and  the  2nd,  5  Grahas  in  the  4th,  8th  and  the 
1st,  one  Grah  in  the  10th  and  the  3rd,  4  Grahas  in  the  5th,  3  Grahas  in  the  6th  and  the  7th  and  1st, 
eight  in  the  12th  are  Karanprad.  Thus  Lagn,  Surya,  Mangal,  Sani  and  Sukr,  these  five  in  the 
1st;  Lagn,  Budh,  Surya,  Candr,  Sani  and  Sukr,  these  6  in  the  2nd;  Guru  in  the  3rd;  Surya,  Sani, 
Candr,  Lagn  and  Mangal,  these  5  in  the  4th;  Sukr,  Budh,  Guru,  these  3  in  the  6th;  Mangal, 
Lagn  and  Sani,  these  3  in  the  7th;  Mangal,  Lagn,  Sani,  Sukr  and  Candr,  these  five  in  the  8th; 
Lagn,  Surya,  Mangal,  Sani,  Budh  and  Guru,  these  6  in  the  9th;  Sani  only  in  the  10th;  none  in 
the  1 1th;  all  the  eight  in  the  12th  from  their  own  places  are  Karanprad.  These  Grahas  in  the 
other  Bhavas  are  Rekhaprad  (line  significators). 

23-27.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Mangal  6  Grahas  in  the  12th,  4th  and  7th,  5  Grahas  in  the  5th,  6 
Grahas  in  the  2nd,  7  Grahas  in  the  9th,  5  Grahas  in  the  1st  and  8th,  4  Grahas  in  the  3rd,  3  Grahas 
in  the  10th  and  2  Grahas  in  the  6th  are  Karanprad.  In  the  1 1th  no  Grah  is  Karanprad.  In  other 
words  all  the  Grahas  in  the  1 1th  from  their  own  places  are  Rekhaprad.  Thus  Surya,  Candr, 
Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr,  these  five  in  the  1st;  Lagn,  Surya,  Candr,  Budh,  Guru  and  Sani,  these  6 
in  the  2nd;  Sukr,  Mangal,  Guru  and  Sani,  these  4  in  the  3rd;  Surya,  Candr,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr 
and  Lagn,  these  6  in  the  4th;  Candr,  Mangal,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Lagn,  these  5  in  the  5th;  Mangal 
and  Sani,  these  2  in  the  6th;  Budh,  Candr,  Surya,  Sukr,  Guru  and  Lagn,  these  6  in  the  7th; 


Budh,  Candr,  Surya,  Lagn  and  Guru,  these  five  in  the  8th;  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru, 
Sukr  and  Lagn,  these  7  in  the  9th;  Sukr,  Candr  and  Budh,  these  3  in  the  10th;  none  in  the  1 1th; 
Surya,  Sani,  Budh,  Candr,  Lagn  and  Mangal,  these  6  in  the  12th  from  their  own  places  are 
Karanprad. 

28-30.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Budh  3  Grahas  in  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  10th,  6th  and  9th,  2  Grahas  in 
the  8th,  6  Grahas  in  the  3rdand  the  7th,  none  in  the  1 1th,  5  Grahas  in  the  5th  and  12th  are 
Karanprad.  Thus  Surya,  Candr  and  Guru,  these  3  in  the  1st;  Guru,  Surya  and  Budh,  these  3  in 
the  2n  ;  Lagn,  Surya,  Mangal,  Sani,  Candr  and  Guru,  these  6  in  the  3r  ;  Budh,  Surya  and  Guru, 
these  3  in  the  4th;  Guru,  Mangal,  Candr,  Sani  and  Lagn,  these  5  in  the  5th;  Sukr,  Sani  and 
Mangal,  these  3  in  the  6th;  Budh,  Candr,  Lagn,  Surya,  Sukr  and  Guru,  these  6  in  the  7th;  Budh 
and  Surya,  these  2  in  the  8th;  Guru,  Candr  and  Lagn,  these  3  in  the  9th;  Surya,  Guru  and  Sukr, 
these  3  in  the  10th;  none  in  the  1 1th;  Lagn,  Candr,  Mangal,  Sani  and  Sukr  these  5  in  the  12th 
from  their  own  places  are  Karanprad. 

3 1-34.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Guru  one  Grah  in  the  2nd  and  1 1th,  2  Grahas  in  the  10th,  7 
Grahas  in  the  12th,  4  Grahas  in  the  6th,  5  Grahas  in  the  8th  and  3rd,  3  Grahas  in  the  remaining 
Bhavas  are  Karanprad.  Thus  Sukr,  Candr  and  Sani,  these  3  in  the  1st;  Sani  in  the  2nd  and  1 1th; 
Lagn,  Mangal,  Candr,  Budh  and  Sukr,  these  5  in  the  3rd;  Surya,  Guru  and  Mangal,  these  3  in 
the  5th;  Sukr,  Sani  and  Candr,  these  3  in  the  4th;  Budh,  Sukr  and  Sani,  these  3  in  the  7th;  Guru, 
Mangal,  Surya  and  Candr,  these  4  in  the  6th;  all  except  Sani,  these  7  in  the  12th;  Candr  and 
Sani,  these  2  in  the  10th;  Sani,  Mangal  and  Guru,  these  3  in  the  9th;  Lagn,  Sani,  Sukr,  Candr 
and  Budh,  these  5  in  the  8th  from  their  own  places  are  Karanprad. 

35-38.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Sukr  2  Grahas  in  the  5th,  8th  and  3rd,  5  Grahas  in  the  1st,  2nd,  12th, 
10th,  8  Grahas  in  the  7th,  6  Grahas  in  the  6th,  one  in  the  9th,  3  in  the  4th,  none  in  the  1 1th  are 
Karanpradas.  Thus  Surya,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru  and  Sani,  these  5  in  the  1st  and  the  2nd;  all  the 
8  Grahas  in  the  7th;  Guru  and  Surya,  these  2  in  the  3rd;  Surya  and  Mangal,  these  2  in  the  5th; 
Surya  in  9th;  Surya,  Budh  and  Guru,  these  3  in  the  4th;  Mangal  and  Budh,  these  2  in  the  8th; 
Sukr,  Surya,  Candr,  Sani,  Lagn  and  Guru,  these  6  in  the  6th;  none  in  the  1 1th;  Lagn,  Sani, 
Budh,  Sukr  and  Guru,  these  5  in  the  12th;  Lagn,  Mangal,  Budh,  Candr,  Surya,  these  5  in  the 
10th  from  their  own  places  are  Karanpradas. 

39-42.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Sani  7  Grahas  in  the  2nd,  7th,  9th,  6  Grahas  in  the  8th,  Lagn  and 
4th,  4  Grahas  in  the  10th,  3rd  and  12th,  one  Grah  in  the  6th,  5  Grahas  in  the  5th,  none  in  the  1 1th 
are  Karanpradas.  Thus  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani,  these  6  in  the  4th  and  the 
1st;  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr,  Sani  and  Lagn,  these  7  in  the  2nd  and  the  7th;  Surya, 
Candr,  Mangal,  Guru,  Sukr,  Sani  and  Lagn,  these  7  in  the  9th;  Candr,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani, 
these  4  in  the  10th;  Guru,  Surya,  Budh  and  Sukr,  these  4  in  the  3rd;  Surya  in  the  6th;  Lagn, 
Candr,  Sani,  Surya,  these  4  in  the  12th;  Sukr,  Surya,  Candr,  Budh  and  Lagn,  these  5  in  the  5th; 
Candr,  Mangal,  Guru,  Sukr,  Sani  and  Lagn,  these  6  in  the  8th;  none  in  the  1 1th  from  their  own 
places  are  Karanpradas.  The  remaining  places  are  Rekhapradas  and  are  auspicious. 

43-45.  The  sage  said.  Now  I  will  describe  the  auspicious  Bhavas  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Acharyas.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Surya:  Sani,  Mangal  and  Surya  in  the  2nd,  8th  and  1st;  Guru 
and  Budh  in  the  5th;  Budh,  Candr  and  Lagn  in  the  3rd;  Lagn,  Surya,  Sani  and  Mangal  in  the 
4th;  Lagn,  Surya,  Sani,  Mangal,  Budh  and  Candr  in  the  10th;  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh, 
Guru,  Sani  and  Lagn  in  the  1 1th;  Lagn,  Sukr  and  Budh  in  the  12th;  Lagn,  Sukr,  Budh,  Guru 
and  Candr  in  the  6th;  Surya,  Mangal,  Sani  and  Sukr  in  the  7th;  Surya,  Mangal,  Sani,  Budh  and 
Guru  in  the  9th  from  their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas. 


46-48.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Candr:  Budh,  Candr  and  Guru  in  the  Is ;  Guru  and  Mangal  in 
the  2nd;  Budh,  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Sani,  Sukr  and  Lagn  in  the  3rd;  Guru,  Sukr  and  Budh  in 
the  4th;  Mangal,  Budh,  Sukr  and  Sani  in  the  5th;  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Sani  and  Lagn  in  the 
6th;  Surya,  Candr,  Guru,  Budh  and  Sukr  in  the  7th;  Surya,  Budh  and  Guru  in  the  8th;  Sukr  and 
Candr  in  the  9th;  Surya,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr,  Candr,  Lagn  and  Mangal  in  the  10th  and  all  the  8 
Grahas  in  the  1 1th  from  their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas.  No  Grah  is  Rekhaprad  in  the  12th. 

49-50.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Mangal:  Lagn,  Sani  and  Mangal  in  the  1st;  Mangal  in  the  2nd; 
Lagn,  Budh,  Candr  and  Surya  in  the  3  rd;  Sani  and  Mangal  in  the  4th;  Budh  and  Surya  in  the 
5th;  Budh,  Candr,  Guru,  Surya,  Lagn  and  Sukr  in  the  6th;  Sani  and  Mangal  in  the  7th;  Sani, 
Mangal  and  Sukr  in  the  8th;  Sani  in  the  9th;  Mangal,  Surya,  Guru,  Sani  and  Lagn  in  10th;  all  in 
the  1 1th  and  Guru  and  Sukr  in  the  12th  from  their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas. 

51-52.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Budh:  Lagn,  Sani,  Mangal,  Sukr  and  Budh  in  the  1st;  Lagn, 
Mangal,  Candr,  Sukr  and  Sani  in  the  2n  ;  Sukr  and  Budh  in  the  3rd;  Lagn,  Candr,  Sani,  Sukr 
and  Mangal  in  the  4th;  Budh,  Sani  and  Sukr  in  the  5th;  Guru,  Budh,  Surya,  Candr  and  Lagn  in 
the  6th;  Mangal  and  Sani  in  the  7th;  Mangal,  Sani,  Lagn,  Candr,  Sukr  and  Guru  in  the  8th;  Sani, 
Mangal,  Surya,  Budh  and  Sukr  in  the  9th;  Lagn,  Sani,  Mangal,  Budh  and  Candr  in  the  10th;  all 
in  the  1 1th  and  Guru,  Budh  and  Surya  in  the  12th  from  their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas. 

53-55.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Guru:  Lagn,  Mangal,  Surya  and  Budh  in  the  1st  and  4th;  Guru, 
Lagn,  Mangal,  Surya,  Budh,  Candr  and  Sukr  in  the  2nd;  Sani,  Guru  and  Surya  in  the  3rd;  Sukr, 
Candr,  Lagn,  Budh  and  Sani  in  the  5th;  Sukr,  Lagn,  Budh  and  Sani  in  the  6th;  Lagn,  Mangal, 
Guru,  Surya  and  Candr  in  the  7th;  Guru,  Surya  and  Mangal  in  the  8th;  Sukr,  Surya,  Lagn, 
Candr  and  Budh  in  the  9th;  Guru,  Budh,  Mangal,  Surya,  Sukr  and  Lagn  in  the  10th;  all  except 
Sani  in  the  1 1th  and  Sani  in  the  12th  from  their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas. 

56-58.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Sukr:  Lagn,  Sukr  and  Candr  in  the  1st;  Lagn,  Sukr  and  Candr  in 
the  2nd;  Lagn,  Sukr,  Candr,  Budh,  Sani  and  Mangal  in  the  3rd;  Lagn,  Sukr,  Candr,  Sani  and 
Mangal  in  the  4th;  Lagn,  Budh,  Candr,  Guru,  Sani  and  Sukr  in  the  5th;  Budh  and  Mangal  in  the 
6th;  none  in  the  7th;  Sukr,  Surya,  Candr,  Guru,  Lagn  and  Sani  in  the  8th;  all  except  Surya  in  the 
9th;  Sukr,  Guru  and  Sani  in  the  10th;  all  in  the  1 1th;  Mangal,  Candr  and  Surya  in  the  12th  from 
their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas. 

59-60.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Sani:  Surya  and  Lagn  in  the  1st;  Surya  in  the  2nd;  Lagn,  Candr, 
Mangal  and  Sani  in  the  3rd;  Lagn  and  Surya  in  the  4th;  Guru,  Sani  and  Mangal  in  the  5th;  all 
except  Surya  in  the  6th;  Surya  in  the  7th;  Surya  and  Budh  in  the  8th;  Budh  in  the  9th;  Surya, 
Mangal,  Lagn  and  Budh  in  the  10th;  all  in  the  1 1th;  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru  and  Sukr  in  the  12th 
from  their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas. 

61-64.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Lagn  3  Grahas  in  the  1st  and  4th,  2  Grahas  in  the  3rd,  5  Grahas  in 
the  2nd,  6  Grahas  in  the  5th,  8th,  9th  and  12th,  one  Grah  in  the  10th,  1 1th  and  6th  and  all  except 
Guru  in  the  7th  are  Karanpradas.  Thus  Lagn,  Surya  and  Candr  in  the  1st;  Lagn,  Mangal,  Candr, 
Surya  and  Sani  in  the  2nd;  Guru  and  Budh  in  the  3rd;  Lagn,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Sani  and 
Surya  in  the  5th;  Lagn,  Candr  and  Mangal  in  the  4th;  Sukr  in  the  6th;  all  except  Guru  in  the  7th; 
Lagn,  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Guru  and  Sani  in  the  8th;  Lagn,  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh  and 
Sani  in  the  9th;  Sukr  in  the  10th  and  1 1th;  Lagn,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani  in  the  12th 
from  their  own  places  are  Karanpradas. 


65-68.  In  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Lagn:  Sani,  Budh,  Sukr,  Gum  and  Mangal  in  the  Is ;  Budh, 
Guru  and  Sukr  in  the  2nd;  Lagn,  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Sukr  and  Sani  in  3rd;  Surya,  Budh, 
Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani  in  the  4th;  Guru  and  Sukr  in  the  5th;  all  except  Sukr  in  the  6th;  Guru  in  the 
7th;  Budh  and  Sukr  in  the  8th;  Guru  and  Sukr  in  the  9th;  all  except  Sukr  in  the  10th;  all  except 
Sukr  in  the  1 1th  and  Surya  and  Candr  in  the  12th  from  their  own  places  are  Rekhapradas. 

69.  In  the  charts  of  AshtakaVarg  Karan  is  signified  by  a  Bindu,  or  dot  (0)  and  Sthan  by  a 
Rekhapradas,  or  line  (1).  Karan  is  inauspicious,  while  Sthan  is  auspicious. 

70-72.  To  identify  the  auspicious  and  inauspicious  Bhavas  in  the  AshtakaVarg  a  chart  should 
be  prepared  with  14  horizontal  lines  and  ten  vertical  lines.  The  form  of  the  chart  so  prepared 
will  consist  of  1 17  apartments.  In  this  chart  in  the  first  line  incorporates  the  names  of  the 
seven  Grahas  and  Lagn.  In  the  first  column  write  the  numbers  of  all  the  12  Bhavas.  After  this 
mark  dots  under  the  Grah  and  against  the  Karanprad  Bhavas.  By  doing  so  the  Karanprad 
Bhavas  of  all  the  8  Grahas,  including  Lagn,  will  become  known  clearly  and  whenever  the 
AshtakaVarg  Grah  will  pass  in  transit  the  dot-marked  Bhavas,  he  will  yield  unfavourable 
results.  In  his  transit  to  other  Bhavas  he  would  give  favourable  effects. The  following  table 
shows  the  dots  in  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Surya. 

Ch.  67.  Trikon  Shodhana  in  the  AshtakaVarg 

1-2.  The  sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  After  preparing  the  AshtakaVarg  of  all  the  Grahas,  including 
Lagn,  Trikon  Shodhana  has  to  be  done  for  each  Rasi.  A  Trikon  is  made  of  three  Rasis 
equidistant  from  each  other.  Thus  Mesh,  Simh  and  Dhanu,  Vrishabh,  Kanya  and  Makar, 
Mithun,  Tul  and  Kumbh,  Kark,  Vrischik  and  Meen  form  the  Trikonas  of  the  Rasis. 

3-5.  The  Trikon  Shodhana  (rectification)  should  be  done  by  writing  the  Rekhas  in  the 
Ashtaka Vargas  of  Surya  etc.  under  the  Rasis  Mesh  etc.  Amongst  the  Trikon  Rasis  the  Rasi, 
which  has  lesser  number  of  Rekhas,  should  be  allotted  Rekhas,  arrived  at  by  deducting  its 
number  of  Rekhas  from  the  greater  number  of  Rekhas  of  the  three  Trikon  Rasis.  No  Trikon 
Shodhana  is  necessary,  if  any  of  the  Trikon  Rasis  has  no  Rekha.  Shodhana  should  be  done,  if 
all  the  three  of  them  have  equal  number  of  Rekhas,  that  is  a  zero  should  be  written  against  all 
of  them.  Thereafter  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  should  be  done  in  the  same  manner,  described 
later.  (For  Shodhana  of  the  AshtakaVarg  of  a  Grah  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  see,  in  which 
Rasi  the  Grah  is  posited.  Beginning  from  that  Rasi,  the  names  of  the  12  Rasis  should  be 
written  and  then  the  names  of  the  Grahas,  posited  in  them,  should  be  mentioned  against  them. 
Thereafter  the  Rekhas,  gained  by  that  Rasi,  should  be  written  below  them  and  the  number, 
achieved  after  Shodhana,  below  it) 

Ch.  68.  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  in  the  AshtakaVarg 

1-5.  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  is  done  after  writing  the  numbers  for  Rasis,  arrived  at  by  Trikon 
Shodhana.  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  is  done,  if  both  the  two  Rasis,  owned  by  a  Grah,  have 
gained  a  number  after  Trikon  Shodhana.  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  is  not  to  be  done,  if  one  Rasi 
has  got  a  number  and  the  other  is  bereft  of  any  number.  The  following  are  the  rules  for 
Ekadhipatya  Shodhana.  If  both  the  Rasis  are  without  a  Grah  and  the  Trikon  Shodhana 
numbers  are  different,  both  should  be  given  the  smaller  number.  If  both  the  Rasis  are  with 
Grahas,  no  Shodhana  is  to  be  done.  If  amongst  the  two  Rasis  one  is  with  a  Grah  and  a  smaller 
Trikon  rectified  number  and  the  other  is  without  Grah  with  a  bigger  number,  deduct  the 


smaller  number  from  the  bigger  number  and  the  number  of  the  Rasi  with  Grah  should  be  kept 
unchanged.  If  the  Rasi  with  the  Grah  has  a  bigger  number  than  that  of  the  Rasi  without  Grah, 
the  Shodhana  should  be  done  of  the  number  of  the  Rasi  without  Grah  and  the  number  of  the 
Rasi  with  Grah  should  be  kept  unchanged.  If  both  the  Rasis  are  without  Grahas  and  possess 
the  same  numbers,  Shodhana  of  both  the  numbers  should  be  done  and  the  rectified  numbers 
should  be  reduced  to  zero.  If  one  Rasi  is  with  Grah  and  the  other  is  without  any  Grah,  the 
number  of  the  latter  should  be  reduced  to  zero.  Surya  and  Candr  own  one  Rasi  only,  their 
numbers  should  be  kept  unchanged. 

6.  After  doing  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana,  Pinda  Sadhana  should  be  taken  in  hand. 

Ch.  69.  Pinda  Sadhana  in  the  AshtakaVarg 

1-4.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  After  completing  the  Trikon  and  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  in 
the  AshtakaVargas  of  all  the  Grahas,  the  rectified  number  should  be  multiplied  by  the 
measure  of  the  Rasi.  If  there  be  any  Grah  in  any  Rasi,  the  rectified  number  should  be 
multiplied  by  the  measure  of  the  Grah  also.  Then,  after  multiplying  the  rectified  number  of 
each  Rasi,  the  products  should  be  added  up.  The  total  so  arrived  at  will  be  Pinda  of  that  Grah. 
The  multiples  of  Rasis  are  10  for  Vrishabh  and  Simh,  8  for  Mithun  and  Vrischik,  7  for  Mesh 
and  Tul,  6  for  Makar  and  Kanya.  The  multipliers  of  the  remaining  Rasis  are  the  same,  as  their 
numbers.  (Rasiman  Chakr.  Mesh  7,  Vris  10,  Mith  8,  Kark  4,  Simh  10,  Kany  6,  Tula  7,  Vrsk  8, 
Dhan  9,  Maka  5,  Kumb  11,  Mina  12)  The  multipliers  of  Grahas  are  10  for  Guru,  3  for 
Mangal,  7  for  Sukr,  6  for  Budh,  Surya,  Candr  and  Sani.  (Grahman  Chakr.  Surya  5,  Candr  5, 
Mangal  8,  Budh  5,  Guru  10,  Sukr  7,  Sani  5) 

Ch.  70.  Effects  of  the  AshtakaVarg 

1-6.  The  matters  to  be  considered  from  Surya  and  other  Grahas  are,  as  follows.  Surya  -  the 
soul  (Atma),  nature,  physical  strength,  joys  and  sorrows  and  father.  Candr  -  mind,  wisdom, 
joy  and  mother.  Mangal  -  co-borns,  strength,  qualities  and  land.  Budh  -  business  dealings, 
livelihood  and  friends.  Guru  -  nourishment  of  the  body,  learning,  son  (children),  wealth  and 
property.  Sukr  -  marriage,  enjoyments,  conveyance,  prostitution  and  sexual  intercourse  with 
women.  Sani  -  longevity,  source  of  maintenance,  grief,  danger,  losses  and  death.  The 
following  procedure  should  be  adopted  to  ascertain  the  effects  of  a  house.  Multiply  the 
number  of  Rekhas  with  the  Yog  Pinda  (Rasi  Pinda  plus  Grah  Pinda),  connected  with  the 
AshtakaVarg  of  that  Grah  and  divide  the  product  by  27.  The  remainder  will  denote  the 
number  of  the  Nakshatr.  During  the  transit  of  Sani  in  that  Nakshatr  the  Bhava  concerned  will 
be  harmed. 

7-9.  The  9th  house  from  Surya  at  the  time  of  birth  deals  with  father.  The  Rekhas  of  that  Rasi, 
as  marked  in  Surya' s  AshtakaVarg,  should  be  multiplied  by  the  Yog  Pinda  and  the  product  be 
divided  by  27.  The  remainder  will  denote  the  number  of  Nakshatr.  The  father  will  be  in 
distress,  or  he  will  otherwise  suffer,  when  Sani  in  transit  passes  through  the  Nakshatr.  Even, 
when  Sani  passes  in  transit  the  Trikon  Nakshatras,  father,  or  relatives,  like  father,  may  die,  or 
suffer. 

Notes.  By  dividing  the  27  Nakshatras  in  three  equal  parts,  the  1st,  10th  and  19th  fall  in  Trikon 
from  each  other.  Surya  is  PitraKarak  (significator  of  father).  Therefore  all  about  father  is 
ascertained  from  the  Surya' s  AshtakaVarg. 


10-11.  If  the  AshtakaVarg  Rekha  number  is  multiplied  by  the  Yog  Pinda  and  the  product  is 
divided  by  12,  the  remainder  will  denote  the  Rasi,  through  which,  or  through  the  Rasis  in 
Trikon  to  it,  the  transit  of  Sani  will  cause  harm,  or  unfavourable  effects  to  father.  Death  of  the 
father  may  occur,  if  the  Dasa  prevailing  at  that  time  be  unfavourable.  If  the  Dasa  be 
favourable,  father  will  face  only  adverse  effects. 

(12-15  Arishta  to  Father)  12-14.  The  death  of  the  father  may  be  expected,  if  Rahu,  Sani,  or 
Mangal  are  in  the  4th  from  Surya  at  the  time  of  transit  of  Sani  through  any  of  the  above  three 
Rasis  (Trikon  Rasis).  The  death  of  the  father  will  come  to  pass  by  such  transit,  if  at  that  time 
Sani,  associated,  or  aspected  by  a  malefic,  be  in  the  9th  from  Lagn,  or  Candr  and/or  the  Dasa 
of  the  Lord  of  the  4th  from  Lagn  be  in  operation.  The  death  does  not  take  place,  if  a  favourable 
Dasa  be  in  force  at  the  time  of  Sani's  transit.  This  should  be  kept  in  mind  by  the  Jyotishis, 
while  making  predictions. 

15.  If  the  Rasi  of  Lagn  of  the  native  be  the  8th  Rasi  from  Lagn  of  the  father,  or,  if  the  Lord  of 
the  8th  from  father's  Lagn  be  in  Lagn  of  the  native,  he  takes  over  all  the  responsibilities  of  his 
father  after  the  latter' s  death. 

16-18.  The  father  enjoys  happiness  in  the  Dasa  of  the  Lord  of  the  4th  from  Lagn.  The  native  is 
obedient  to  his  father,  if  the  Lord  of  the  4*  be  in  Lagn,  or  the  1  \x ,  or  in  the  1  \x  ,  or  10*  from 
Candr.  If  the  birth  be  in  the  3rd  Rasi  from  Lagn,  or  Candr  of  the  father,  the  native  makes 
proper  use  of  the  wealth,  inherited  from  his  father.  If  the  birth  be  in  the  10th  Rasi  from  Lagn, 
or  Candr  of  the  father,  the  native  will  inherit  all  the  good  qualities  of  his  father.  If  the  Lord  of 
the  10th  be  in  Lagn,  the  native  will  be  more  distinguished  than  his  father. 

19-20.  No  auspicious  functions,  like  marriage  etc.,  should  be  performed  in  the  month  of  Rasis 
(that  is,  when  Surya  transits  that  Rasi),  which  has  more  number  of  dots  in  Surya' s 
AshtakaVarg.  The  same  applies  to  the  Samvatsar  of  that  Rasi  (that  is,  when  the  mean  Guru 
transits  that  Rasi).  Auspicious  functions  should  be  performed,  when  Surya,  or  the  mean  Guru 
transits  the  Rasi,  which  has  more  Rekhas  in  Surya' s  AshtakaVarg. 

21-23.  In  the  same  manner  no  auspicious  functions  should  be  performed  during  the  transit  of 
Candr  in  the  Rasi,  which  has  larger  number  of  dots  in  Candr' s  AshtakaVarg.  Consideration, 
regarding  mother,  house  and  village,  should  be  done  from  the  4th  Bhava  from  Candr. 
Therefore  multiply  the  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Candr  by  the  Yog  Pinda  of 
that  AshtakaVarg  and  divide  the  product  by  27.  The  death  of,  or  distress  to  mother  may  be 
expected,  when  Sani  passes  in  transit  through  the  Nakshatr,  denoted  by  the  remainder.  Then 
divide  the  product  by  12.  The  death  of  the  mother  may  occur,  when  Sani  transits  the  Rasi, 
denoted  by  the  remainder.  Distress  to  mother  may  be  predicted,  when  Sani  transits  the 
Nakshatras,  or  Rasis  in  Trikon  to  Nakshatr  and  Rasi,  indicated  above. 

24-27.  Consideration  of  brothers  (co-borns),  valour  and  patience  is  done  from  Mangal's 
AshtakaVarg.  If  the  number  of  Rekha  is  larger  in  any  Rasi  after  Trikon  Shodhana,  there  will 
be  gains  of  land,  happiness  from  wife  and  great  happiness  to  brother,  when  Mangal  passes 
through  that  Rasi  in  transit.  If  Mangal  be  weak,  the  brothers  will  be  short  lived.  There  will  be 
distress  to  brothers,  when  Mangal  transits  a  Rasi  without  Rekhas.  Here  also  the  Yog  Pinda  of 
Mangal  should  be  multiplied  by  the  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  AshtakaVarg  and  the  product  be 
divided  separately  by  27  and  12.  The  remainders  will  denote  the  Nakshatr  and  Rasi.  The 
brother  will  suffer,  whenever  Sani  transits  that  Nakshatr,  or  Rasi  (or  the  Trikon  Nakshatras,  or 
Rasis). 


28-29.  Consideration  in  regard  to  family,  maternal  uncle  and  friends  should  be  done  from  the 
4th  Bhava  from  Budh.  The  family  etc.  will  enjoy  happiness  during  the  transit  of  Budh's 
AshtakaVarg.  After  performing  Trikon  and  Ekadhipatya  Shodhana  in  Budh's  AshtakaVarg, 
the  happiness,  or  distress  of  the  family  should  be  predicted  from  the  transit  of  Sani  through 
the  resultant  Nakshatr  and  Rasi  (and  those  in  Trikon  to  them). 

30-33.  All  about  knowledge,  religious  inclinations  of  the  native  and  son  (progeny)  is  to  be 
ascertained  from  the  5th  Bhava  from  Guru.  If  the  Rekhas  in  the  5th  Bhava  from  Guru  are  larger 
in  number  in  the  AshtakaVarg,  there  will  be  great  happiness  in  respect  of  progeny.  If  the  dots 
are  larger  in  number,  the  happiness  in  respect  of  progeny  will  be  meagre.  The  number  of 
children  are  equal  to  the  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  5th  Bhava  (from  Guru),  provided  it  is  not  the 
Rasi  of  debilitation  of  Guru,  or  his  enemy's  Rasi.  In  that  case  the  number  of  children  will  be 
very  limited.  The  number  of  children  is  also  equal  to  the  number  of  Navams,  in  which  the 
Lord  of  the  5th  from  Guru  is  posited.  Multiply  the  Yog  Pinda  of  Guru  by  the  number  of 
Rekhas  in  the  AshtakaVarg  and  divide  the  product  separately  by  27  and  12.  The  remainders 
will  denote  the  Nakshatr  and  Rasi.  Transit  of  Sani  through  that  Nakshatr  and  its  Trikon 
Nakshatras  and  of  that  Rasi  and  its  Trikon  Rasis  will  be  inauspitious.  During  that  period  the 
knowledge,  learning  and  religious  activities  of  the  native  will  also  be  adversely  affected. 

34-36.  There  will  be  gain  of  wealth,  land  and  happiness  and  marriage,  whenever  Sukr  passes 
in  transit  through  the  Rasis,  which  have  larger  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  AshtakaVarg  of  Sukr. 
These  gains  will  be  from  the  directions  of  the  7th  Rasi  from  Sukr  and  of  its  Trikon  Rasis.  The 
effects  should  be  judged  in  the  manner,  already  explained  earlier,  after  multiplying  the  Rekhas 
in  the  7th  Bhava  from  Sukr  by  the  Yog  Pinda. 

37-40.  The  8th  Bhava  from  Sani  signifies  death,  as  well  as  longevity.  Assessment  about 
longevity  should  be  made  from  that  Bhava  through  the  AshtakaVarg.  Therefore  predict 
distress  to  the  native  in  the  year,  equal  to  the  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  AshtakaVarg  from 
Lagn  up  to  Sani.  The  year,  equal  to  the  number  of  Rekhas  from  Sani  up  to  Lagn,  will  also  be 
of  distress.  If  in  the  year,  equal  to  the  total  of  the  above  Rekhas,  Arishta  Dasa  be  also  in 
operation,  there  can  be  possibility  of  death  of  the  native. 

41-42.  Multiply  the  Yog  Pinda  by  the  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  AshtakaVarg  and  divide  the 
product  by  27.  The  death  of  the  native  will  take  place,  when  Sani  passes  in  transit  through  the 
Nakshatr,  denoted  by  the  remainder,  or  its  Trikon  Nakshatras.  Again,  divide  the  product  by 
12.  The  native  will  face  danger  of  death,  when  Sani  passes  in  transit  through  the  Rasi,  denoted 
by  the  remainder,  or  through  its  Trikon  Rasis. 

43-44.  The  results  will  be  favourable,  when  Sani  passes  in  transit  through  Rasis,  which  have 
larger  number  of  Rekhas  in  Sani's  AshtakaVarg.  Sani's  transit  through  Rasis,  which  have 
larger  number  of  dots,  will  produce  only  evil  effects. 

Ch.  71.  Determination  of  Longevity  through  the 
AshtakaVarg 

1-4.  The  sage  said.  I  will  now  describe  the  method  of  determining  longevity  from  the 
AshtakaVarg.  For  this  purpose  the  Ashtaka Vargas  of  Lagn  and  all  the  Grahas  have  to  be 
studied.  The  Rekhas  in  all  the  Rasis  have  been  allotted  specific  spans  of  life.  The  Rasi,  which 
has  no  Rekhas,  has  been  allotted  2  days,  that  with  one  Rekha  gets  IV2  days,  one  day  for  Rasi 


with  2  Rekhas,  half  day  for  Rasi  with  3  Rekhas,  IVi  days  for  Rasi  with  4  Rekhas,  2  years  for 
Rasi  with  5  Rekhas,  4  years  for  Rasi  with  6  Rekhas,  6  years  for  Rasi  with  7  Rekhas  and  8 
years  for  Rasi  with  8  Rekhas.  In  this  manner  the  spans  of  life  should  be  worked  from  Rekhas 
in  all  the  Ashtaka Vargas.  Half  of  the  sum  total  of  all  will  be  the  longevity,  based  on 
AshtakaVarg. 

Ch.  72.  Aggregational  AshtakaVargas 

1-2.  The  sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  Write  down  a  Rasi  Kundali  with  12  Bhavas,  including  Lagn. 
Then  insert  the  total  of  the  Rekhas  in  all  the  AshtakaVargas  of  the  Grahas  in  the  Rasi 
concerned.  The  AshtakaVarg  with  such  Rekhas  is  called  the  Samuday  AshtakaVarg,  or  the 
aggregational  AshtakaVarg.  From  this  should  be  judged  good  and  adverse  effects  of  the  Rasi 
Kundali. 

3-5.  In  the  aggregational  AshtakaVarg  the  Rasi,  which  has  more  than  30  Rekhas,  gives 
favourable  effects,  that,  having  between  25  and  30  Rekhas,  produces  medium  effects  and  that 
Rasi,  who  has  less  than  25  Rekhas,  yields  adverse  effects.  Auspicious  functions,  like  marriage 
etc.,  should  be  performed,  when  the  Grah,  on  whose  basis  the  time  and  date  of  functions  are 
performed,  moves  into  the  Rasi  with  favourable  effects.  The  Rasi,  which  is  productive  of 
adverse  effects  should  be  avoided  for  these  purposes.  For  example,  the  strength  of  Candr 
(CandraBal)  is  generally  acceptable  for  all  auspicious  functions.  Therefore  auspicious 
functions  should  be  performed,  or  started,  when  Candr  is  in  the  Rasi  with  maximum  number 
of  Rekhas.  The  Grah  in  the  Rasi  with  favourable  number  of  Rekhas  produces  auspicious 
effects  and  the  Grah  in  the  Rasi  with  unfavourable  number  of  Rekhas  yields  evil  results. 

6-61/2.  Amongst  the  12  Bhavas  more  than  30  Rekhas  advance  the  effects  of  a  Bhava,  between 
25  and  30  Rekhas  produce  medium  effects  and  the  effects  of  the  Bhava,  which  contains  less 
than  25  Rekhas,  get  damaged. 

Notes.  From  the  above  rules  it  can  be  interpreted,  that,  if  there  are  less  than  25  Rekhas  in  6th, 
8th  and  12th  Bhava,  their  effects  become  favourable.  The  effects  will  become  adverse,  if  these 
Bhavas  contain  more  than  25  Rekhas. 

7-8.  If  in  a  Rasi  Kundali  there  are  larger  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  1  \x  than  those  in  10l  and 
there  are  smaller  number  of  Rekhas  in  the  12th  than  those  in  the  1 1th  and  Lagn  contains  largest 
number  of  Rekhas,  the  native  will  be  wealthy  and  will  enjoy  all  kinds  of  comforts  and  luxury. 

9-10.  Divide  the  12  Bhavas  in  3  sections.  There  will  be  sufferings  and  distress  in  that  part  of 
the  life,  which  is  represented  by  the  section  of  the  Rasi  Kundali  with  more  malefics.  There 
will  be  happiness  etc.,  in  the  part  of  the  life,  represented  by  the  section  of  the  Rasi  Kundali, 
containing  more  benefics.  There  will  be  mixed  results  in  that  area  of  life,  when  the  relative 
section  of  the  Rasi  Kundali  has  equal  number  of  benefics  and  malefics.  The  Bhavas  from 
Lagn  up  to  the  4th 
represent  old  age. 


Lagn  up  to  the  4th  signify  childhood,  those  from  5th  to  8th  youth  and  those  from  the  9th  to  12th 


1 1-28.  There  will  be  danger  of  death  in  the  month  of  the  Rasi  (period  of  Surya's  transit  in  that 
Rasi),  which  has  7,  or  less  than  7  Rekhas  in  the  Samudaya  AshtakaVarg.  To  ward  off  this  evil 
effect  20  Tolas  of  gold  and  2  heaps  of  sesame  seeds,  resembling  the  shape  of  a  mountain, 
should  be  given  in  charity.  . . .  possibility  of  death  . . . ,  ...  8.  Tuladan  of  camphor  is 
recommended  to  obtain  relief  from  this  evil  effect.  . . .  danger  of  snakes  . . . ,  ...  9.  A  chariot 


with  7  horses  should  be  given  in  charity danger  from  weapons  . . . ,  which  contains  10 

....  An  armour  together  with  Vajra  should  be  given  in  charity  to  ward  off danger  of 

disgrace  for  no  cause  . . .,  ...  1 1.  An  idol  of  the  moon,  made  of  10  Tolas  of  gold,  should  be 

given  in  charity danger  of  death  from  drowning  . . . ,  ...  12.  Land  full  of  crops  should  be 

given  in  charity danger  of  death  from  wild  and  violent  animals  . . . ,  in  which  there  are 

13  ....  A  Shaligram  Shila  should  be  given  in  charity danger  of  death  . . . ,  ...  14.  A 

Varah  Murti,  made  of  gold,  should  be  given  in  charity danger  of  the  wrath  of  the  king 

. . .,  ...  15.  An  elephant  should  be  given  in  charily danger  of  Arishta  (calamity,  disaster, 

or  misfortune)  . . . ,  ...  16.  A  Kalpa  Vriksha,  made  of  gold,  should  be  given  in  charity 

danger  from  diseases  . . .,  that  has  17  ....  A  cow  and  jaggery  should  be  given  in  charity 

danger  of  conflict . . .,  ...  18.  A  cow,  jewels,  land  and  gold  should  be  given  in  charity 

possibility  of  banishment  from  the  homeland  . . .,  which  has  19  ....  Family  deity  should  be 

worshipped loss  of  intelligence  . . . ,  ...  20.  Goddess  Saraswati  should  be  worshipped 

distress  from  diseases  . . .,  that  has  21  ....  A  heap  of  grains,  shaped,  like  a  mountain, 

should  be  given  in  charity distress  to  kinsmen  . . . ,  ...  22.  Gold  should  be  given  in 

charity  ....  The  native  will  be  in  distress  .......  23.  An  idol  of  the  sun,  made  of  7  Tolas  of 

gold,  should  be  given  in  charity death  of  the  kinsmen  . . . ,  ...  24.  10  cows  should  be 

given  in  charity loss  of  wisdom  . . . ,  ...  25.  Goddess  Saraswati  should  be  worshipped 

loss  of  wealth  . . . ,  ...  26.  Gold  should  be  given  in  charity loss  of  wealth  . . . ,  ... 

27.  Sri  Sukta  Japa  should  be  performed losses  in  several  ways  . . . ,  ...  28.  Havana  of 

Surya  should  be  performed anxieties  all-round  . . . ,  ...  29.  Ghl,  clothes  and  gold  should 

be  given  in  charity gains  of  wealth  and  grains  etc.  . . . ,  ...  30. 

29.  There  will  be  all-round  increase  in  wealth,  happiness  in  respect  of  children  and 
enjoyments  in  the  Samvatsar,  month  and  Nakshatr  of  the  Rasi,  which  has  more  than  30 
Rekhas.  . . .  increase  in  wealth,  property,  children  and  good  reputation,  if  the  Rasi  has  more 
than  40  Rekhas. 

30-31.  The  Rasi,  which  is  auspicious  in  AshtakaVarg  Samudaya,  is  considered  auspicious  for 
all  auspicious  functions.  Consequently  the  auspiciousness  of  AshtakaVarg  should  be  got 
checked  before  performing  any  function,  like  marriage  etc.  If  a  Rasi  is  not  auspicious  in 
AshtakaVarg,  then  its  auspiciousness  should  be  checked  from  transit  effects.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  check  transit  effects,  if  a  Rasi  is  auspicious  in  AshtakaVarg.  Thus  the 
auspiciousness  of  the  Rasi  in  the  AshtakaVarg  should  be  considered,  as  paramount. 

Ch.  73.  Effects  of  the  Rays  of  the  Grahas 

1-2.  The  sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  am  going  to  tell  you  about  the  number  of  rays  of  the 
Grahas.  When  Surya  etc.  are  in  their  deep  exaltation  point,  their  rays  are:  Surya  10,  Candr  9, 
Mangal  5,  Budh  5,  Guru  7,  Sukr  8  and  Sani  5.  The  rays  are  nil,  when  these  Grahas  are  in  deep 
debilitation,  the  number  of  rays  would  be  proportionate  with  the  number  of  Rasi.  The 
following  method  is  to  be  adopted  for  ascertaining  the  proportionate  number  of  rays.  Deduct 
the  debilitation  Rasi  etc.  of  the  Grah,  whose  rays  are  to  be  ascertained,  from  his  longitude.  If 
the  remainder  is  less  than  6  Rasis  it  should  be  multiplied  by  the  number  of  rays  of  that  Grah, 
mentioned  above  and  the  product  should  be  divided  by  6.  The  result  will  denote  the  number  of 
rays  of  that  Grah.  In  case  after  deduction  the  remainder  is  more  than  6  Rasis,  then  it  should  be 
deducted  from  12.  The  other  procedure  will  remain  the  same. 

3-7.  The  Sage  said.  O  Maitreya!  Other  Acharyas  have  recommended  further  correction  of  the 
number  of  rays,  worked  out  in  the  manner  described  above.  The  corrections  have  to  be  made, 


as  follows.  If  the  Grah  be  in  his  exaltation  Rasi,  the  number  of  rays  ascertained  should  be 
trebled.  . . .  Mooltrikon,  . . .  doubled.  . . .  own  Rasi,  . . .  multiplied  by  3  and  the  product  be 
divided  by  2.  ...  Rasi  of  his  Adhimitr  (great  friend),  . . .  multiplied  by  4  and  the  product  be 
divided  by  3.  ...  Bhava  of  a  friend,  . . .  multiplied  by  6  and  the  product  be  divided  by  5.  The 
number  of  rays  ascertained  should  be  halved,  if  the  Grah  be  in  the  Bhava  of  his  enemy.  If  he 
be  in  the  Bhava  of  his  Adhi-Shatru  (great  enemy),  the  number  of  rays  ascertained  should  be 
multiplied  by  2  and  the  product  be  divided  by  5.  No  correction  is  to  be  made,  if  the  Grah  is  in 
the  Bhava  of  a  neutral.  The  effects  should  be  declared  after  computation  of  the  net  number  of 
rays  of  each  Grah. 

8-18.  The  effects,  produced  by  the  number  of  rays  of  Grahas,  are  given  below.  Between  1  and 
5  poor  and  unhappy,  even  if  born  in  an  eminent  family.  Between  6  and  10  poor,  carrier  of 
loads  and  without  wife  and  children.  1 1  meagre  wealth  and  few  children.  12  meagre  wealth, 
idiot  and  wicked.  13  thief.  14  wealthy,  protector  and  maintainer  of  several  families,  learned 
and  observer  of  the  traditions  of  the  family.  15  head  of  the  family,  achieves  proficiency  in 
many  kinds  of  learnings,  good  qualities.  This  is  what  Lord  Brahma  has  said.  16  most 
distinguished  in  the  family.  17  employer  of  many  servants.  18  maintainer  of  large  family.  19 
possessor  of  name  and  fame.  20  blessed  with  a  large  family  and  kinsmen.  21  maintainer  and 
protector  of  50  persons.  22  charitable  and  kind.  23  well  cultured  and  happy.  Between  24  and 
30  healthy,  powerful,  favourite  of  the  king,  splendourous,  possessor  of  a  large  family. 
Between  3 1  and  40  minister  and  maintainer  and  protector  of  100  to  1000  persons.  Between  40 
and  50  king.  51  and  above  powerful  sovereign. 

19.  The  effects  should  be  predicted,  according  to  the  number  of  rays  of  the  Grahas  at  the  time 
of  birth,  after  taking  into  account  the  status  of  the  native. 

20.  For  example,  if  the  rays  are  more  than  50  in  number,  one  born  a  Kshatriya  king's  family 
will  become  a  powerful  sovereign,  one  born  in  a  Vaishya  family  will  become  a  king  (or  high 
dignitary),  one  born  in  Sudra  family  will  become  wealthy  and  one  born  in  a  Brahmin  family 
will  become  very  learned  and  will  observe  all  religious  norms. 

21. The  effects  of  the  Grahas,  moving  from  their  debilitation  to  exaltation,  are  full.  The  effects 
of  the  Grahas,  moving  from  their  exaltation  to  debilitation,  will  be  lesser  than  described 
above. 

22-23.  Auspicious  and  inauspicious  effects  of  all  the  Grahas  are  according  to  the  number  of 
rays  they  possess.  The  prediction  will  not  be  correct  without  the  knowledge  of  the  effects  of 
the  rays.  Therefore  it  is  imperative,  that  in  the  judgment  of  Rasi  Kundalis  and  declaring 
results  the  effects  of  the  number  of  rays  of  the  Grahas  be  taken  into  account. 

Ch.  74.  Effects  of  the  Sudarshana  Chakr 

1-3.  Maharishi  Parasara  said  to  Maitreya.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  will  impart  to  you  the 
knowledge  of  a  great  secrecy  and  superior  importance,  which  was  communicated  to  me  by 
Lord  Brahma  himself  for  the  benefit  of  the  world.  This  is  a  Chakr  by  the  name  of  Sudarshana, 
through  which  Devajnas  will  be  able  to  predict  the  favourable  and  unfavourable  results  for 
every  year,  every  month  and  every  day  from  the  time  of  birth  to  the  time  of  death  of  a  person. 
Listen  to  this  very  intently. 


4.  O  Brahmin!  Take  a  point  and  from  it  draw  three  circles.  Within  the  circles  draw  12  lines,  so 
as  to  provide  12  Bhavas  within  each  circle.  This  is  how  Sudarshana  Chakr  is  drawn. 

5-6.  In  the  first  circle  (innermost)  place  the  12  Bhavas  from  Lagn  with  Grahas,  posited  there. 
In  the  circle  next  to  the  innermost  circle  place  the  12  Bhavas  from  the  Rasi  of  Candr  with  the 
Grahas  in  them.  In  the  third  circle  place  the  12  Bhavas  from  the  Rasi  of  Surya  with  Grahas  in 
them.  Thus  there  will  be  3  Rasis  in  each  Bhava  of  the  Chakr. 

7-9.  The  significant  aspect  of  this  Chakr  is,  that  Lagn,  Candr  and  Surya  represent  the  first 
Bhava.  The  2nd,  3rd  etc.  up  to  12th  from  Candr  and  Surya  will  deal  with  the  same  subject,  as 
they  do,  when  reckoned  from  Lagn.  Then  the  results  should  be  assessed,  according  to  the 
Grahas  in  each  Bhava.  In  this  form  of  Rasi  Kundali  Surya  is  considered  auspicious  in  the  first 
Bhava  and  inauspicious,  or  malefic  in  other  Bhavas.  The  malefics  do  not  produce  evil  effects, 
if  they  are  in  their  exaltation  Rasi.  In  this  manner  predictions  should  be  made,  after 
considering  the  benefic  and  malefic  natures  of  the  Grahas,  their  disposition  and  aspects  from 
and  on  them. 

10.  A  Bhava  gets  advancement,  if  it  is  occupied,  or  aspected  by  the  Lord,  or  a  benefic.  The 
Bhava,  which  is  occupied,  or  aspected  by  a  malefic,  is  harmed. 

11-13.  The  effects  of  a  Bhava  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  Grah  occupying  it,  or  in 
accordance  with  the  Grah  aspected,  if  no  Grah  is  in  occupation  of  the  Bhava.  The  effects  of  a 
Bhava,  occupied  by  a  benefic,  will  be  auspicious  and  the  Bhava,  occupied  by  a  malefic,  will 
be  inauspicious.  Effects  of  the  aspects  will  be  the  same.  If  a  Bhava  is  influenced  both  by 
benefics  and  malefics,  the  results  will  depend  on  the  majority  amongst  the  benefics  and 
malefics.  If  the  number  of  benefics  is  larger  than  the  number  of  malefics,  the  results  will  be 
auspicious.  If  reverse  is  the  case,  inauspicious,  or  evil  effects  may  be  expected.  If  there  are 
equal  number  of  malefics  and  benefics,  those  with  greater  strength  will  influence  the  results  of 
that  Bhava.  Mixed  results  should  be  declared,  if  there  be  no  difference  in  the  strength  of 
malefics  and  benefics.  The  same  would  apply  to  aspects. 

14.  The  effects  should  be  declared,  according  to  its  Lord,  if  the  Bhava  is  neither  occupied,  nor 
aspected  by  a  Grah. 

15-16.  A  natural  benefic  loses  his  benevolence,  if  he  is  in  more  malefic  Vargas.  Similarly  a 
natural  malefic  loses  his  malevolence,  if  he  is  in  more  benefic  Vargas  (SaptaVarg).  A  Grah's 
own  Rasi,  his  exaltation  Rasi  and  benefic  Vargas  are  considered  auspicious.  And  malefic  and 
the  Vargas  of  an  enemy  and  debilitated  Rasi  are  considered  inauspicious. 

17.  The  sage  said,  that  the  results  should  be  declared  only  after  assessing  the  auspiciousness 
and  inauspiciousness  of  all  the  Bhavas. 

18.  Maitreya  asked.  O  Venerable  sage!  Kindly  enlighten  me  on  one  point.  If  all  the  Bhavas 
are  judged  in  accordance  with  the  Sudarshana  Chakr,  why  many  learned  sages  have  advocated 
declaration  of  effects  from  the  Bhavas,  reckoned  from  Lagn  in  Rasi  Kundali? 

19-20.  The  sage  replied.  The  results  should  be  declared  in  accordance  with  the  Sudarshana 
Chakr,  only  when  Surya  and  Candr  being  in  separate  Rasis  different  from  the  Rasi  of  Lagn.  If 
amongst  Lagn,  Surya  and  Candr,  all  the  three,  or  two  of  them  are  in  the  same  Rasi,  the 
judgment  of  effects  should  be  made  from  the  Rasi  Kundali  only. 


(21-23)  The  sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  will  tell  you  about  the  effects,  produced  every  year 
and  every  month  by  the  twelve  Bhavas  in  their  Dasas  and  Antardasas,  according  to 
Sudarshana  Chakr.  Under  this  system  every  one  of  the  twelve  Bhavas,  beginning  from  the  1st, 
is  allotted  a  Dasa  period  of  one  year.  Thus  every  year  in  12  years  a  Bhava  becomes  Lagn  of 
the  year  and  the  remaining  become  2nd,  3rd  and  so  on.  Every  year  every  Bhava  will  have 
Antardasa  of  one  month.  By  following  the  method  of  Lagn  of  the  year  here  also,  there  will  be 
a  Lagn  of  the  month.  The  first  Antardasa  will  be  of  the  first  Bhava  and  then  will  follow  for  12 
months  the  Antardasas  of  the  other  Bhavas,  every  Bhava  assuming  the  role  of  Lagn  by  turn. 
Every  Bhava  gets  Pratyantar  Dasa  of  2Vi  days  and  Vidasa  of  12V2  Ghatikas.  The  same  method 
is  to  be  adopted  forjudging  the  effects  of  Bhavas  in  Pratyantar  Dasas  and  Vidasas. 

24-26.  At  the  time  of  commencement  of  a  Dasa,  if  there  be  benefic  in  the  1st,  4th,  7th,  10th,  5th, 
9th  and  8th,  favourable  effects  will  be  experienced  in  the  concerned  year,  month  etc.  The 
Bhava,  which  is  occupied  by  only  Rahu,  or  Ketu,  becomes  harmful.  The  same  will  be  the  fate 
of  the  Bhava,  which  is  occupied  by  a  larger  number  of  malefics.  If  there  be  benefics  in  Bhavas 
other  than  the  12th,  or  6th,  the  Bhava  concerned  will  produce  favourable  effects.  In  other 
words,  if  the  benefics  be  in  the  12th,  or  6th  from  the  Bhava  concerned,  unfavourable  effects 
will  be  derived  in  the  related  year,  month  etc.  If  there  be  malefics  in  the  3rd,  6th  and  1 1th  from 
the  Bhava,  assuming  the  role  of  Lagn,  then  these  three  Bhavas  will  produce  auspicious  results. 
The  effects  can  be  ascertained  for  every  year,  month  etc.  in  this  manner.  The  total  number  of 
years  in  Vimsottari  Dasa  are  120  years.  After  every  12  years  the  same  method  of  determining 
the  Dasas,  Antardasas  etc.  has  to  be  repeated  for  Lagn  and  other  Bhavas. 

27-28.  After  ascertaining  the  effects  of  the  years,  months  etc.  in  accordance  with  the 
Sudarshana  Chakr,  assessment  of  effects  for  the  years,  months  etc.  should  be  made  on  the 
basis  of  AshtakaVarg.  The  benefic,  or  malefic  effects  will  be  full,  if  the  assessment  from  both 
produces  the  same  results.  If  they  are  different,  the  comparative  strength  of  both  should  be 
taken  into  account  to  declare  the  final  results. 

Ch.  75.  Characteristic  Features  of  Panchmahapurushas 

1-2.  The  sage  said.  O  Maitreya!  Now  I  will  relate  to  you  the  characteristic  features  of 
Panchmahapurushas.  When  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani,  being  in  their  own,  or 
exaltation  Rasi,  be  in  Kendra  to  Lagn,  they  give  rise  to  Ruchaka,  Bhadra,  Hamsa,  Malavya 
and  Sasa  Yogas.  These  Yogas  are  called  Panchmahapurusha  Yogas  and  the  persons,  born  in 
these  Yogas,  are  known  Panchmahapurushas. 

3-7.  The  Ruchaka  native  possesses  a  long  face,  he  is  very  enthusiastic,  has  spotless  lustre,  is 
powerful,  has  attractive  brows,  black  hair  and  is  fond  of  all  things.  He  loves  to  fight  wars,  is 
of  dark-red  complexion,  is  victorious  over  enemies,  is  discriminating,  is  protector  of  thieves 
and  has  cruel  temperament  and  slender  thighs.  He  is  a  devotee  of  Brahmins,  has  marks  of 
Veena,  Varg,  Dhanus,  Pasha  and  Vrasha  Rasis  in  his  hands  along  with  Chakr  Rekha.  He  is 
well  versed  in  occult  sciences.  He  is  100  Anguls  in  height,  his  waste  has  the  circumference, 
equal  to  the  length  of  his  face  and  is  1000  Karshas  in  weight.  He,  as  ruler  of  Sahyachala  and 
Vindhya  Pradesh,  dies,  after  attaining  the  age  of  70,  by  fire  or  weapons. 

Notes.  The  old  Rupee  had  the  weight  of  1  Karsha.  4  Karshas  are  equal  to  one  Pala  and  300 
Palas  make  one  Tula,  according  to  Amarkosha.  20  Tulas  are  equal  to  one  Bhara. 


8-12.  The  Bhadra  native  is  splendourous,  like  a  lion,  has  very  developed  chest  (or  chest  with 
well  developed  muscles),  has  the  gait  of  an  elephant,  has  long  and  thick  arms,  is  learned  in  all 
respects.  He  is  well  versed  in  Yog  performance,  is  Sattva-Guni  and  has  beautiful  feet, 
moustaches  and  head.  He  is  fond  of  luxuries  and  comforts  and  has  marks  of  Sankha  (conch), 
Chakr,  Gada,  arrow,  elephant,  Dhwaja  (flag)  and  Hala  (plough)  in  his  hands  and  feet.  He  is 
well  versed  in  Shastras,  has  black  and  curly  hair,  possesses  independent  nature  and  is 
protector  of  his  family.  His  friends  share  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  wealth.  He  is  20  tulas  in 
weight.  He  lives  happily  with  his  wife  and  children  and,  as  ruler  of  Madhya  Desha,  lives  for 
one  hundred  years. 

13-16.  The  Hamsa  native  has  voice,  like  a  Hamsa,  has  a  handsome  appearance  and  well 
developed  nose.  He  is  a  king  with  phlegmatic  temperament,  honey-like  tawny-coloured  eyes, 
red-coloured  nails,  sharp  intelligence,  sturdy  cheeks,  round  forehead  and  beautiful  feet.  He 
has  marks  of  Matsya  (fish),  Ankush  (the  iron  hook,  with  which  elephants  are  driven),  Dhanus 
(bow),  Sankh,  Kamal  (lotus)  in  his  hands  and  feet.  He  is  very  passionate  and  his  lust  remains 
unfulfilled.  He  is  96  Anguls  in  height.  He  is  fond  of  swimming  and  playing  games  in  watery 
places.  He  enjoys  life  fully  and,  as  ruler  of  a  land,  situated  between  the  Ganges  and  Yamuna, 
dies  after  attaining  the  age  of  100  years. 

17-19.  The  Malavya  native  has  beautiful  lips  and  a  slender  waist.  He  is  lustrous,  like  Candr, 
and  has  fragrance  in  his  body.  He  is  of  ordinary  red  complexion,  has  a  medium  stature  and 
clean  and  beautiful  teeth.  His  voice  is  like  that  of  an  elephant  and  his  arms  are  long  enough  to 
reach  up  to  his  knees.  His  face  is  thirteen  Anguls  in  length  and  ten  Anguls  in  breadth.  He  lives 
happily  for  seventy  years,  as  ruler  of  Sindhu  and  Malwa,  and  then  leaves  for  his  heavenly 
abode. 

20-22.  The  Sasa  native  has  small  sized  teeth  and  face,  but  his  body  is  not  small.  He  is 
valorous.  He  has  a  slender  waist  and  beautiful  thighs.  He  is  wise  and  enjoys  wandering  in 
forests  and  mountains.  He  is  well  versed  in  the  loopholes  of  the  enemy.  He  is  lively,  virile  and 
fond  of  women.  He  usurps  other  people's  wealth.  He  has  marks  of  Mala  (garland),  Veena, 
Mridanga  (musical  instruments)  and  weapons  in  his  hands  and  feet.  He  rules  happily  over 
several  parts  of  the  earth  and  then  leaves  for  his  heavenly  abode  at  the  age  of  70. 

Ch.  76.  Effects  of  the  Elements 

1.  The  sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  will  tell  you  about  the  effects  of  the  five  elements:  space, 
air,  fire,  water  and  earth. 

2.  Space,  air,  fire,  water  and  earth  are  ruled  by  Guru,  Sani,  Mangal,  Sukr  and  Budh.  The 
effects  are  experienced  in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  various  elements. 

3-4.  The  native  will  have  temperament,  according  to  the  greater  strength  of  the  Grah  at  the 
time  of  birth.  Guru,  Sani,  Mangal,  Sukr  and  Budh  will,  respectively,  give  spacial  (etheral), 
airy  (windy),  fiery,  watery  and  earthy  temperament.  If  all  of  them,  or  many  of  these  Grahas 
have  equal  strength,  the  temperament  will  be  of  a  mixed  character. 

5.  If  Surya  be  endowed  with  strength,  the  native  will  have  fiery  temperament.  If  Candr  be 
strong,  the  native  will  have  watery  temperament.  All  the  Grahas  in  course  of  their  Dasa 
endow  the  native  with  bodily  lustre,  relating  to  their  elements. 


6.  The  characteristic  features  of  the  person  with  fiery  temperament  are:  distressed  with 
hunger,  restless,  lean  and  thin  body,  learned,  consumes  a  large  quantity  of  food,  sharp,  fair- 
complexioned  and  proud. 

I .  ...  earthy:  emits  fragrance  of  camphor  and  lotus,  is  fond  of  luxuries,  comforts  and 
enjoyments  and  is  permanently  happy,  forgiving  and  has  a  deep  voice,  like  a  lion. 

8.  . . .  etheral:  acquainted  with  semasiology,  expert  in  diplomacy,  brilliant,  learned,  unmasked 
face  and  long  stature. 

9.  ...  watery:  is  lustrous,  can  sustain  burdens,  is  soft-spoken,  king,  has  many  friends  and  is 
learned. 

10.  ...  airy:  charitable,  full  of  anger,  fair  complexion,  fond  of  wandering,  victorious  over 
enemies,  king  and  has  lean  physique. 

II.  When  the  fire  element  is  predominant  in  a  person,  his  face  and  body  exhibit  lustre,  like 
gold  and  he  has  happy-looking  eyes.  He  achieves  success  in  all  his  ventures,  is  victorious  over 
his  enemies  and  gets  gains  of  wealth. 

12.  ...  earth,  the  body  of  the  person  emits  various  kinds  of  fragrances.  His  nails,  hair  and  teeth 
are  are  clean.  He  gets  gains  of  happiness  and  wealth  and  is  religious-minded. 

13.  ...  ether,  the  person  is  a  clever  conversationalist  and  becomes  happy  by  learning  to  songs 
etc. 

14.  ...  water,  the  person's  body  is  slender,  he  enjoys  good  health  and  tasty  food  and  is  happy 
on  that  account. 

15.  ...  air,  the  body  is  filthy.  The  person  becomes  an  idiot  and  suffers  from  rheumatism, 
sorrows  and  agonies. 

16.  The  sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  The  effects  of  the  elements,  which  I  have  described  above,  will 
be  realized  in  full,  if  the  Grahas  concerned  are  endowed  with  adequate  strength.  If  they  are 
weak,  the  effects  will  be  reduced  in  proportion  to  their  weakness. 

17.  If  the  Grah  concerned  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  or  be  placed  in  an  inauspicious  Bhava, 
the  elemental  effects  will  be  adverse,  that  is,  opposite  to  the  effects,  described  above.  If  a 
Grah  is  without  strength,  his  elemental  effects  will  be  experienced  only  in  imagination. 

18.  If  a  person's  time,  date  and  place  of  birth  is  not  known,  he  should  determine  the  Dasa  of  a 
Grah  from  the  effects,  mentioned  above  and,  if  he  is  facing  evil  effects,  he  should  take 
appropriate  remedial  measures  to  appease  the  Grah  concerned. 

Ch.  77.  Effects  of  the  Gunas 

1-4.  The  Great  Sage  Parasara  said.  O  Brahmin!  When  the  Sattva-Guni  Grahas  are 
predominant,  the  person  born  is  Sattva-Guni  and  of  good  character.  When  Rajo-Guna 
(passion  of  love  and  pleasure)  is  predominant,  the  person  born  is  Rajo-Guna  and  intelligent. 
When  the  Tamo-Guna  (attribute  of  darkness)  is  predominant,  the  person  born  is  stupid.  When 


at  the  time  of  birth  all  the  Grahas  are  of  equal  dominance,  the  person  has  a  mixture  of  all  the 
attributes.  The  persons  (creatures)  so  born  are  classified,  as  Uttama  (most  excellent), 
Madhyama  (of  intermediate  type),  Adhama  (despisable)  and  Udaseena  (indifferent,  or  neutral) 
in  that  order.  Thus  there  are  four  kinds  of  animate  beings  (Prani).  I  will  relate  their  attributes, 
which  have  been  described  by  Narada  and  other  sages. 

5.  The  natural  attributes  of  persons,  belonging  to  Uttam  class,  are  possession  of  control  over 
organs  of  perception  and  mind,  simplicity,  truthfulness,  patience  and  satisfaction. 

6.  Valour,  splendour,  patience,  cleverness,  not  retreating  in  war  and  protecting  the  holy  men 
are  the  natural  attributes  of  persons,  belonging  to  Rajo-Guna. 

7.  Greed,  falsehood,  idiocy,  laziness  and  doing  service  of  others  are  the  inborn  attributes  of 
persons,  who  belong  to  Adham  class. 

8.  Engagement  in  agriculture  and  business,  protection  of  cattle  and  speaking  both  truth  and 
lies  are  inborn  attributes  of  persons,  belonging  to  Udaseena  class. 

9.  O  Maitreya!  Classify  the  people,  as  Uttama,  Madhyama,  Adhama  and  Udaseena  after 
observation  of  the  attributes,  described  above.  A  person  should  be  considered  appropriate  for 
a  job,  according  to  his  attributes. 

10.  If  amongst  Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas  any  attribute  is  the  most  dominant,  it  is  considered  the 
most  predominant  of  all.  Otherwise  all  have  equal  effects. 

1 1 .  The  affectionate  relationship  between  an  employer  and  employee  and  man  and  women 
will  be  invariable  and  stable,  if  they  possess  the  same  attributes. 

12.  O  Maitreya!  Amongst  the  above  four  classes  of  persons,  if  there  is  any  kind  of 
relationship  of  even  Adhama  with  Udaseena,  of  Udaseena  with  Madhyama  and  of  Madhyama 
with  Uttama,  there  will  be  mutual  affection  and  happiness. 

13.  If  the  bridegroom  has  better  attributes  than  the  bride  and  the  master  has  better  attributes 
than  the  servant,  there  will  be  mutual  affection  (regard  for  each  other)  and  happiness.  If  the 
bride,  or  the  servant  possesses  better  attributes,  the  relationships  will  be  full  of  bitterness. 

14.  The  attributes  of  the  native  are  dependent  on  his  father  and  mother,  his  time  of  birth  and 
the  persons,  he  gets  associated  with.  These  are  the  root  causes  of  Uttama  etc.  qualities, 
possessed  by  him.  The  attributes,  endowed  by  the  time  of  the  birth  and  associations,  are 
stronger  than  those,  received  from  the  parents. 

15.  Consequently  the  person  is  embellished  with  the  attribute  Sattva,  Rajas,  or  Tamas, 
whichever  is  predominant  at  the  time  of  birth.  The  predictions  should  therefore  be  made  after 
taking  into  account  the  time  of  birth. 

16.  The  Supreme  Lord  of  the  Universe,  who  is  indestructible  and  omnicient,  is  the  Kal.  He  is 
the  Creator,  Protector  and  Destroyer  of  all  movable  and  immovable. 

17.  These  three  faculties  of  Lord  Kal  are  called  nature.  Divided  by  these  faculties,  the 
imperceptible  Lord  Kal  is  also  perceptible. 


18.  In  accordance  with  the  self-created  qualities  by  the  Perceptible  form  of  Lord  Kal,  there  are 
four  kinds  of  limbs,  namely  Uttama,  Madhyama,  Udaseena  and  Adhama. 

19.  From  the  Uttama,  Madhyama,  Udaseena  and  Adhama  parts  are  created  Uttama, 
Madhyama,  Udaseena  and  Adhama  types  of  creatures. 

20.  The  Uttama  part  of  Lord  Kal  is  the  head,  Madhyama  part  both  arms  and  chest,  thighs  form 
the  Udaseena  part  and  the  feet  fall  in  the  Adhama  part. 

21.  This  is  how  a  differentiation  is  made  between  classes  of  movables  and  immovables, 
according  to  attributes  and  the  parts,  from  which  the  creations  are  made. 

22.  The  Chaturvidha  (four  sided)  Lord  Kal  has  thus  created  this  Chaturvidha  universe  in 
consonance  with  his  own  attributes. 

Ch.  78.  Lost  Horoscopy 

1-2.  Maitreya  said.  O  Sage!  You  have  so  far  described  the  auspicious  and  inauspicious  effects 
to  be  enjoyed,  or  suffered  by  a  person  on  the  basis  of  the  time  of  birth,  but  can  the  auspicious 
and  inauspicious  be  ascertained,  when  the  time  of  birth  is  not  known?  Kindly  tell  me,  if  there 
is  any  way  to  solve  this  problem. 

3-4.  The  Sage  said.  Your  question  is  a  good  one  and  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  at  large. 
Considering  your  attachment,  I  will  tell  you  about  this  problem  also.  If  any,  or  all  amongst  the 
Samvatsar,  Ayana,  Ritu,  month,  Paksha,  Tithi,  Nakshatr,  Lagn,  Rasi,  or  Amsas  etc.  of  the 
birth  are  not  known,  these  can  be  ascertained  from  Prasna  Lagn  (Query  chart). 

5-6.  The  Samvatsar  of  the  birth  of  the  querist  will  be  the  same,  as  that  of  the  Rasi  in  the 
Dwadasams,  in  which  the  Prasna  Lagn  falls  (Guru  will  be  in  that  Rasi  at  birth).  Saumyayan 
(Uttarayan  -  the  northern  course  of  Surya)  will  be  in  the  first  Hora  of  Lagn  and  Yamyayan 
(Dakshinayan  -  the  southern  course  of  Surya)  will  be  in  its  second  Hora.  The  Ritu  (season) 
may  be  determined  with  reference  to  the  Lord  of  the  Drekkan,  in  which  Lagn  falls.  Shishir 
will  be  indicated  by  the  Drekkan  of  Sani,  Grishma  by  that  of  Surya  and  Mangal,  Vasanta  by 
that  of  Sukr,  Varsha  by  that  of  Candr,  Sharad  by  that  of  Budh  and  Hemanta  by  that  of  Guru. 

7.  If  there  be  any  contradiction  in  the  Ayana  and  Ritu,  the  Ritu  may  be  determined  from  Budh 
in  place  of  Mangal,  from  Sukr  in  place  of  Candr  and  from  Sani  in  place  of  Guru. 

8-9.  After  the  Ritu  becomes  known  take  the  first  part  of  the  Drekkan,  as  its  first  month  and 
latter  part,  as  the  next  month  of  the  Ritu.  Then  from  the  expired  Amsas  of  the  Drekkan 
determine  proportionately  the  Tithi,  or  the  Amsas  of  Surya.  The  Istakal,  indicated  by  the 
Amsas  (degrees)  of  Surya,  will  be  the  time  of  the  birth  of  the  querist.  From  the  Istakal  so 
calculated  have  to  be  worked  out  the  longitudes  of  the  Grahas  and  Bhavas  (Grah  Spast  and 
Bhava  Spast).  Predictions  should  then  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  dispositions  of  the 
Bhavas  and  Grahas. 

10.  Maitreya  asked.  O  Sage!  Guru  returns  to  the  same  Rasi  after  every  12  years.  Then  from 
which  circle  of  Guru  should  Samvatsar  be  determined. 


11-12.  The  Sage  said  in  reply.  O  Maitreya!  When  there  is  any  doubt  about  the  Samvatsar,  take 
the  approximate  age  of  the  querist  and  add  multiples  of  12  to  the  difference  between  the  Rasi 
of  the  Guru  at  the  time  of  query  and  his  Rasi  at  the  time  of  birth.  The  figure  so  arrived  at 
should  be  taken,  as  the  possible  number  of  years  and  the  Samvatsar  should  be  determined 
accordingly.  If  by  adding  12  there  may  appear  to  be  difference  in  age,  the  position  of  Guru 
should  be  fixed,  according  to  guessed  approximate  age,  in  the  Trikon  Rasi,  5th,  or  9th  of  the 
Prasna  Lagn,  as  may  be  found  feasible.  Then,  taking  that,  as  the  Samvatsar,  the  Ayana,  Ritu 
etc.  should  be  worked  out  accordingly  in  the  manner  already  explained. 

13.  Maitreya  asked  again.  O  Sage!  How  will  the  time  of  birth  be  known  after  ascertaining  the 
month  and  the  Amsas  etc.  of  Surya.  Please  explain  this  for  the  benefit  of  the  people. 

14-16.  The  Sage  said.  After  ascertaining  the  Rasi,  Amsas  etc.  of  Surya  at  the  time  of  birth,  the 
longitude  of  Surya  (Surya  Spast)  should  be  worked  out  for  the  next  day  after  the  number  of 
days,  taken  by  Surya  after  entering  into  the  Rasi,  which  will  be  equal  to  the  expired  Amsas  of 
Surya.  Then  the  difference  between  the  longitudes  of  this  rising  Surya  and  Surya  at  the  time 
of  birth  should  be  converted  into  Kalas  and  multiplied  by  60.  The  product  should  be  divided 
by  Surya  Spast,  converted  into  Kalas.  The  Ghatikas  etc.  so  becoming  available  will  represent 
the  Istakal  of  the  birth  before  and  after  sunrise.  If  the  longitude  of  the  Ista  Surya  be  more  than 
that  of  the  rising  Surya,  the  Istakal  of  the  birth  will  be  so  much  after  the  sunrise.  If  the 
longitude  of  the  Ista  Surya  be  less  than  that  of  the  rising  Surya,  the  Istakal  of  the  birth  will  be 
so  much  before  the  sunrise. 

Ch.  79.  Ascetism  Yogas 

1.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  will  describe  to  you  the  Yogas,  leading  to  ascetism, 
under  the  influence  of  which  the  persons  give  up  their  homes  and  become  initiated  in  some 
holy  order. 

2-3.  The  Yog  for  ascetism  is  formed,  when  four,  or  more  Grahas,  possessed  of  strength, 
occupy  a  single  Bhava.  The  person  born  will  become  a  Tapasvi,  a  Kapali,  he  will  be  wearing 
a  red  robe,  be  one,  who  keeps  a  Danda  (staff),  Yati,  he  will  be  keeper  of  a  Chakr,  or  he  will  be 
a  naked  Sanyasin,  according  to  the  Grah,  which  is  the  strongest  of  the  group:  Surya,  Candr, 
Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr,  or  Sani.  If  a  number  of  Grahas  are  endowed  with  strength,  the 
holy  order  of  the  one,  strongest  amongst  them,  is  accepted. 

Notes.  There  is  a  similar  verse  in  Varahamihir' s  Brihat  Jatak,  which,  translated  into  English 
reads,  as  under.  "If  at  birth,  four,  or  more  Grahas,  possessed  of  strength,  occupy  a  single 
Bhava,  the  person  born  will  become  a  Sakya,  Jeevika,  Bhikshu,  a  Vriddha,  or  Guru,  a  Charak, 
a  Nirgrantha,  or  Visava,  a  Vanyasana,  or  Vanaprastha,  according  to  which  of  the  Grahas  is  the 
strongest  Grah  of  the  group:  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Candr,  Sukr,  Sani,  or  Surya.  If  the 
strongest  Grah  be  conquered  in  planetary  war  by  another  Grah,  or  Grahas  at  the  time  of  birth, 
the  person  will  relinquish  that  stage  of  ascetic  life  and  review  to  his  previous  condition  of 
life."  A  Vanaprastha  is  a  religious  man,  engaged  in  the  practice  of  rigorous  and  devout 
penance  (i.e.  he  will  be  a  Tapasvi);  a  Vivas  is  a  naked  ascetic  (that  is  dwelling  in  hills  and 
forests).  A  Bhikshu  is  an  illustrious  ascetic  with  a  single  staff  for  his  symbol,  engaged  ever 
and  anon  in  the  contemplation  of  truths  of  the  sacred  scriptures.  A  Charak  is  a  religious 
mendicant,  wandering  over  many  countries.  A  Shakya  is  an  ascetic  of  the  Buddhist  clan.  A 
Guru  is  a  celebrated  teacher,  endowed  with  royal  splendour.  A  Jeevika  is  a  garrulous  and 
gluttonous  mendicant. 


4.  If  strong  Grahas,  capable  of  leading  to  ascetism,  be  obscure  by  Surya' s  rays  (that  is  they  be 
combust),  the  person  born,  in  spite  of  having  reverence  for  the  holy  order,  will  not  become 
initiated  in  that  holy  order. 

Notes.  Brihat  Jatak  adds  in  this  connection,  that,  if  the  Grahas  referred  to  above  be  overcome 
in  planetary  war  and  be  aspected  by  other  Grahas,  the  person  concerned  will  seek  admission 
into  the  holy  order  without  success. 

5.  If  the  other  Grahas  lose  their  strength  (in  spite  of  being  in  their  exaltation  Rasis  etc.),  as  a 
result  of  combustion  with  Surya,  the  native  will  enter  the  holy  order,  as  signified  by  Surya, 
that  is,  he  will  become  a  Tapasvi. 

6.  If  the  Lord  of  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  Candr  (Janm  Rasi),  having  no  aspect  of  other  Grahas 
on  himself,  aspects  Sani,  the  native  gets  initiated  into  the  holy  order  of  the  Grah,  who  is 
stronger  amongst  the  two. 

7.  If  the  Lord  of  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  Candr,  be  devoid  of  strength  and  is  aspected  only  by 
Sani,  the  native  becomes  initiated  into  the  holy  order,  signified  by  Sani  (Nirgranthas,  naked 
ascetics). 

8.  If  Candr  be  in  the  decanate  of  Sani,  or  in  the  Navams  of  Sani,  or  Mangal  and  be  aspected 
by  Sani,  the  native  becomes  an  ascetic  and  enters  the  holy  order,  signified  by  Sani. 

9.  There  is  planetary  war,  if  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr  and  Sani  are  together  (within  one 
degree  of  each  other),  Sukr  is  the  conquerer,  whether  he  is  in  North,  or  South,  but  amongst  the 
other  four  only  one,  who  is  in  the  North,  is  the  conquerer  and  that  in  the  South  is  considered 
defeated  in  the  planetary  war. 

10.  If  the  Grah,  who  leads  the  native  to  ascetism,  is  conquered  in  planetary  war  by  another 
Grah,  or  Grahas  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  person  will  relinquish  the  holy  order,  in  which  he 
becomes  initiated. 

11.  Maitreya  asked.  O  Venerable  Sage!  If  there  be  many  Grahas,  who  are  significators  for 
ascetism,  then,  which  holy  order  the  native  will  get  initiated  into? 

12.  Maharishi  Parasara  replied.  O  Brahmin!  If  all  the  Grahas  be  possessed  of  strength,  the 
native  enters  into  the  holy  orders  of  all  the  Grahas. 

13.  The  native  gets  initiated  into  the  holy  order  of  the  Grah,  whose  Dasa  gets  into  operation  at 
first.  Then  he  relinquishes  this  holy  order  of  this  Grah  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dasa  of 
the  next  Grah  and  accepts  the  holy  order,  signified  by  him. 

14.  When  Guru,  Candr  and  Lagn  are  aspected  by  Sani  and  Guru  occupies  the  9th,  the  person, 
born  in  the  Rajayog,  will  become  a  holy  illustrious  founder  of  a  system  of  philosophy  (holy 
order). 

15.  When  Sani  occupies  the  9th  from  Lagn  and  is  not  aspected  by  any  Grah,  the  person, 
possessed  of  Rajayog,  will  take  himself  to  the  holy  order,  before  becoming  a  Lord  of  men.  If 
there  be  no  Rajayog  the  native  becomes  an  ascetic  (religious  wanderer). 


Ch.  80.  Female  Horoscopy 

1.  Maitreya  asked.  O  Sage!  You  have  described  the  effects  of  many  kinds.  Now  be  kind 
enough  to  throw  light  on  StrT  Jatak  (female  horoscopy). 

2.  Maharishi  Parasara  replied.  What  a  good  question!  Listen  to  what  I  am  going  to  tell  you 
about  the  Rasi  Kundalis  of  females.  All  the  effects,  that  have  been  described  till  now  in  the 
case  of  male  horoscopies,  will  apply  to  females  also.  Matters,  relating  to  her  physical 
appearance,  should  be  determined  from  Lagn,  those,  relating  to  children,  from  the  5th  Bhava, 
fortune  for  the  husband  from  the  7th  and  death  of  the  husband  (widowhood)  should  be 
deduced  from  the  8th.  Those  effects,  which  are  impossible  to  ascribe  to  the  female,  should  be 
declared  to  be  applicable  to  her  husband. 

Brihat  Jatak.  "Of  the  effects,  that  have  been  described  till  now  in  the  case  of  male  horoscopes 
and  those,  that  may  be  found  in  female  horoscopes,  suitable  to  females,  should  be  declared,  as 
applicable  to  them  alone.  The  rest  should  be  ascribed  to  their  husbands.  The  death  of  the 
husband  is  to  be  deduced  through  the  8th  place  (from  Lagn,  or  Candr,  whichever  is  stronger). 
Matters,  relating  to  her  appearance,  beauty  etc.,  should  be  determined  from  Lagn  and  the  Rasi, 
occupied  by  Candr.  It  is  from  the  7th  place  (from  Lagn,  or  Candr),  that  her  welfare  (happiness) 
and  the  nature  of  the  husband  should  be  ascertained." 

Mantreswara' s  Phaldeepika.  "Whatever  effects  are  declared  for  men,  they  are  entirely 
applicable  to  women  too.  The  woman's  prosperity  and  happiness  have  to  be  deduced  from  the 
8th  place  (from  Lagn,  or  Candr,  whichever  is  stronger).  Children  should  be  declared  from  the 
9th  Bhava  and  matters,  relating  to  her  appearance,  beauty  etc.,  should  be  determined  from 
Lagn.  It  is  from  the  7th  place,  that  her  welfare  (power  of  influencing  her  husband)  and  the 
nature  of  the  husband  should  be  ascertained,  while  her  association  and  chastity  should  be 
predicted  from  an  examination  of  the  4th  Bhava.  Benefics  in  those  Bhavas  produce  good 
results,  while  malefics  in  the  above  Bhavas  are  productive  of  evil,  unless  they  happen  to  own 
the  Bhavas,  in  which  case  the  effects  will  be  good." 

Jatak  Parijata.  Whatever  effects  may  accrue  from  the  horoscopes  of  females,  applicable  only 
to  men,  should  be  ascribed  to  the  husband.  The  good  and  evil,  affecting  their  person,  should 
be  calculated  from  Candr  and  Lagn,  whichever  of  them  is  stronger.  It  is  from  the  7th  Bhava 
from  Lagn,  or  Candr,  that  all,  that  is  worthy,  or  unworthy  in  the  husband  should  be 
ascertained  and  the  death  of  the  husband  is  foretold  through  the  8th.  All  this  should  be  well 
weighed  by  the  strength,  or  weakness  of  the  Grahas,  benefic  and  malefic.  Before  an 
announcement  is  made,  of  Lagn  and  Candr  find,  which  is  stronger.  It  is  with  reference  to  this, 
that  the  luck,  beauty  and  strength  of  the  women  should  be  announced.  Children  and  wealth  in 
abundance  should  be  declared  through  the  9th  Bhava  therefrom.  Wedded  happiness,  or 
otherwise  should  be  gathered  from  the  8th  and  husband's  fortune  from  the  7th.  Some  Jyotishis 
opine,  that  the  well-being,  or  the  reverses  of  the  husband  can  be  determined  from  the  9th. 

5.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a  woman  Lagn  and  Candr  are  in  even  Rasis,  the  woman  will  be 
truly  feminine  in  character.  She  will  possess  excellent  qualities,  be  of  steadfast  character, 
beautiful  and  physically  fit. 

6.  If  Lagn  and  Candr  are  in  odd  Rasis,  she  will  be  masculine  in  form  and  masculine  in  bearing 
and,  if  they  be  associated  with,  or  aspected  by  malefics,  she  will  be  devoid  of  good  qualities 
and  be  sinful. 


7.  If  amongst  Lagn  and  Candr  one  be  in  an  even  Rasi  and  the  other  be  in  an  odd  one,  the 
woman  concerned  should  be  declared  to  partake  the  characteristics  of  both  male  and  female. 
The  qualities  of  Lagn,  or  Candr  will  be  more  predominant,  according  to  their  strength. 

8.  O  Brahmin!  The  effects  in  respect  of  women  would  particularly  depend  on  the  Rasi  and 
Trimsams  of  Lagn,  or  Candr,  whichever  is  stronger. 

9-16.  When  Lagn,  or  Candr  is  in  a  Rasi,  belonging  to  Mangal,  the  woman,  born  in  a  Trimsams 
of  Mangal,  will  have  illicit  relations  with  a  man  before  marriage.  If  she  be  born  in  Trimsams 
of  Sukr,  she  will  become  unchaste  after  marriage;  if  of  Budh,  she  will  be  full  of  guile  and 
adept  in  conjuration;  if  the  Trimsams  be  of  Guru,  she  will  be  worthy  and  virtuous;  she  will  be 
menial,  or  slave,  if  birth  be  in  a  Trimsams  of  Sani.  ...  in  a  Rasi,  owned  by  Budh,  the  female, 
born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Mangal,  will  be  full  of  guile,  will  be  a  hard-worker;  if  the  Trimsams  be 
of  Sukr,  will  be  possessed  of  good  qualities;  if  of  Budh,  will  be  of  the  nature  of 
hermaphrodite;  if  of  Guru,  will  be  chaste.  In  a  Rasi,  owned  by  Sukr,  a  female,  born  in  a 
Trimsams  of  Mangal,  will  be  deprived;  if  the  Trimsams  be  of  Sukr,  will  be  well  known  and 
possessed  of  excellent  qualities;  if  of  Budh,  will  be  skilled  in  all  arts;  she  will  be  endowed 
with  all  good  qualities,  if  born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Guru;  she  will  remarry,  if  born  in  a  Trimsams 
of  Sani.  When  Lagn,  or  Candr  happens  to  be  in  a  Rasi,  owned  by  Candr  and  the  Trimsams  of 
birth  is  owned  by  Mangal,  the  female  born  will  be  self-willed  and  uncontrolled;  she  will  be 
unchaste  and  of  loose  character,  if  born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Sukr;  will  be  skilled  in  arts  and 
handiwork,  if  of  Budh;  will  be  gifted  with  all  excellent  qualities,  if  of  Guru;  will  become  a 
widow,  if  of  Sani.  . . . ,  owned  by  Surya  and  the  Trimsams  of  birth  be  owned  by  Mangal,  the 
female  born  will  be  very  talkative;  she  will  be  virtuous,  if  born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Sukr;  will 
bear  masculine  features,  if  of  Budh;  will  be  chaste  and  virtuous,  if  of  Guru;  will  be  unchaste, 
if  of  Sani.  When  the  rising  Rasi,  or  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  Candr,  is  owned  by  Guru,  the 
female,  born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Mangal,  will  be  endowed  with  many  good  qualities;  she  will  be 
Punschali,  if  born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Sukr;  will  be  well  versed  in  many  sciences,  if  of  Budh; 
will  be  endowed  with  all  good  qualities,  if  of  Guru;  will  not  indulge  much  in  sexual 
intercourse,  if  of  Sani.  When  Lagn,  or  the  Rasi,  occupied  by  Candr,  belongs  to  Sani,  the 
female,  born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Mangal,  will  be  a  maid-servant;  she  will  be  learned  (barren, 
according  to  Brihat  Jatak),  if  born  in  a  Trimsams  of  Sukr;  will  be  cruel  and  immoral,  if  of 
Budh;  will  be  devoted  to  her  husband,  if  of  Guru;  will  be  unchaste  (addicted  to  men  of  low 
caste,  according  to  Brihat  Jatak),  if  of  Sani. 

17-21.  If  the  7th  Bhava  be  without  a  Grah  (without  strength)  and  without  benefic  aspect,  the 
female  born  will  have  a  coward  and  contemptible  wretch  for  her  husband.  When  the  7th  Bhava 
is  a  moveable  Rasi,  the  husband  will  always  be  away  from  home.  If  Budh  and  Sani  be  in  the 
7th  Bhava,  the  husband  of  the  woman  concerned  will  be  impotent.  If  Surya  occupies  the  7th 
Bhava,  the  woman  concerned  is  abandoned  by  her  husband.  If  Mangal  be  in  the  7th,  the 
female  concerned  becomes  a  widow  in  her  childhood.  If  Sani  be  in  the  7th,  she  lives  to  an  old 
age,  remaining  unmarried.  If  there  be  a  malefic,  she  becomes  a  widow,  while  young.  If  there 
be  a  benefic  in  the  7th,  the  female  born  will  enjoy  marital  happiness  and  will  be  chaste.  If  there 
be  both  benefics  and  malefics  in  the  7th,  both  benefic  and  evil  effects  will  be  experienced.  If 
Mangal  be  in  the  Navams  of  Sukr  and  Sukr  be  in  the  Navams  of  Mangal,  the  female 
concerned  will  have  illicit  relations  with  other  men.  If  in  this  Yog  Candr  be  in  the  lx ,  the 
female  concerned  enters  into  illicit  connections  at  the  instance  of  her  husband. 


22-25.  If  at  woman's  birth  the  7th  Bhava,  or  the  setting  Navams  be  that  of  Mangal,  the 
husband  will  be  fond  of  other  women  and  will  be  of  an  irascible  temper.  If  it  be  a  Rasi,  or 


Navams  of  Budh,  her  husband  will  be  very  learned  and  clever.  If  it  be  a  Rasi,  or  Navams  of 
Guru,  the  husband  of  the  woman  concerned  will  be  of  great  merit  and  will  have  passions 
under  his  control.  If  it  be  a  Rasi,  or  Navams  of  Sukr,  her  husband  will  be  fortunate,  very 
good-looking  and  liked  by  women.  If  the  Rasi,  or  Navams  belongs  to  Sani,  her  husband  will 
be  an  old  man  and  a  fool.  If  the  Rasi,  or  Navams  be  Simh,  her  husband  will  be  exceedingly 
soft  in  his  disposition  and  will  be  very  hard-working.  If  the  7th  Bhava,  or  the  setting  Navams 
be  a  Rasi,  owned  by  Candr,  the  husband  of  the  woman  will  be  love-sick  and  gentle.  If  there  be 
different  Rasis  and  Navamsas  in  the  7th,  the  effects  will  be  of  a  mixed  nature.  The  effects  of 
the  Rasis  and  Navamsas  will  depend  on  their  strength. 

26-29.  If  in  a  female's  horoscope  Surya  be  in  the  8th,  the  native  will  be  unhappy,  poverty- 
stricken,  of  deformed  limbs  and  without  faith  in  religion.  If  Candr  be  in  the  8th,  the  woman 
concerned  will  be  of  a  defective  vagina,  will  have  ugly  breasts,  with  sinister  eyes,  without 
robes,  or  ornaments,  sickly  and  will  be  defamed  in  the  society.  If  Mangal,  the  native  will  be  of 
weak  constitution,  sickly,  widow,  ugly-looking  and  full  of  sorrows  and  agonies.  If  Budh,  she 
will  be  without  faith  in  religion,  timid,  devoid  of  wealth,  self-respect  and  good  qualities  and 
she  will  be  quarrelsome. 

30-33.  If  in  a  female's  horoscope  Guru  be  in  the  8th,  the  woman  concerned  will  be  shameless 
and  without  virtue,  will  have  few  children,  fatty  hands  and  feet,  will  be  abandoned  by  her 
husband  and  be  gluttonous.  If  Sukr  be  in  the  8l ,  she  will  be  fond  of  pleasures,  devoid  of 
sympathy,  religion,  wealth,  will  be  dirty  and  deceptive.  If  Sani,  the  woman  concerned  will  be 
of  wicked  disposition,  dirty,  deceptive  and  devoid  of  conjugal  harmony.  If  Rahu,  she  will  be 
ugly,  without  marital  happiness,  cruel -hearted,  sickly  and  unchaste. 

34.  The  woman  will  be  barren,  if  in  her  Rasi  Kundali  Candr  and  Sukr  be  associated  with  Sani, 
or  Mangal  and  the  5th  Bhava  be  occupied,  or  aspected  by  a  malefic. 

35.  If  the  7th  be  in  the  Navams  of  Mangal,  the  vagina  will  be  diseased.  If  the  7th  be  the 
Navams  of  a  benefic,  she  will  have  a  well  formed  female  organ  and  will  be  beloved  by  her 
husband. 

36.  If  Mithun,  or  Kanya  Lagn  in  a  female's  horoscope  is  occupied  by  Sukr  and  Candr,  the 
woman  concerned  lives  happily  and  is  equipped  with  all  kinds  of  comforts  in  her  father's 
house. 

37.  If  Candr,  Budh  and  Sukr  be  in  Lagn,  the  woman  concerned  is  endowed  with  many  good 
qualities  and  happiness.  If  Guru  be  in  Lagn,  she  is  happy,  wealthy  and  has  children. 

38.  If  the  8th  Bhava  be  Simh,  or  Kark  and  Surya  and  Candr  be  both  placed  there,  the  woman 
concerned  will  be  barren.  If  the  8th  be  Mithun,  Kanya,  or  Kark  and  Budh  and  Candr  be  posited 
there,  the  female  native  will  have  only  one  child. 

39.  The  woman  concerned  will  be  definitely  barren,  if  Lagn  be  Mesh,  Vrischik,  Makar,  or 
Kumbh  and  Candr  and  Sukr  be  posited  there,  aspected  by  malefics. 

40.  The  woman  concerned  will  give  birth  to  an  already  dead  child,  if  the  7th  be  occupied  by 
Rahu  and  Surya,  or  Guru  and  Rahu  be  in  the  8th  and  the  5th  be  occupied  by  malefics. 


41.  The  woman  concerned  will  not  be  able  to  conceive,  if  Gum  and  Sukr  be  associated  with 
Mangal  in  the  8th,  or  Mangal  be  with  Sani  in  the  8th. 

42.  The  woman  concerned  becomes  a  destructor  of  her  husband's  family  and  her  father's 
family,  if  at  her  birth  Candr  and  Lagn  be  subjected  to  Papa  Kartari  Yog  (direct  malefics  in 
12th  and  retrograde  malefics  in  2nd). 

43.  The  woman,  whose  birth  takes  place  under  the  following  conditions,  is  named,  as  Visha 
Kanya.  Day  of  birth  Sunday,  Nakshatr  Aslesha,  2nd  Tithi;  Saturday,  Krittika,  7th  Tithi; 
Tuesday,  Satabhisha,  12th  Tithi. 

44.  The  woman  will  be  Visha  Kanya,  if  at  birth  Lagn  be  occupied  by  a  malefic  and  a  benefic 
and  two  Grahas  be  in  inimical  Rasis. 

45.  Visha  Kanya  gives  birth  to  a  child  already  dead.  She  has  a  defective  generative  organ  and 
is  bereft  of  robes,  ornaments  etc. 

46.  The  evil  effects  of  Visha  Kanya  are  destroyed,  if  the  Lord  of  the  7th  is  a  benefic,  or  a 
benefic  Grah  be  in  the  7l  from  Lagn,  or  Candr. 

47.  The  woman  born  becomes  a  widow,  if  Mangal  be  in  the  12th,  4th,  7th,  or  8th  from  Lagn, 
without  aspect  by,  or  association  with  any  benefic. 

48-49.  The  Yog,  which  causes  the  woman  to  become  widow  also  causes  a  male  native  to 
become  a  widower.  If  the  man  and  woman,  possessing  this  Yog,  join  in  wedlock,  the  Yog 
ceases  to  have  any  effect. 

50-51.  If  at  a  woman' s  birth  the  rising  Rasi  be  that  of  Sukr  and  the  rising  Navams  be  of  Sani 
(Kumbh,  according  to  Brihat  Jatak)  and,  if  Sukr  and  Sani  aspect  each  other,  or  are  occupying 
each  other's  Navams,  she  will  be  afflicted  with  too  much  lust  and  will  allay  her  fire  of  passion 
with  the  help  of  other  females,  acting  the  part  of  a  male. 

52.  When  Guru,  Mangal,  Budh  and  Sukr  are  strong  and,  when  the  rising  Rasi  is  an  even  one, 
the  woman  born  will  be  learned  in  Shastras  and  an  expounder  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy. 

53.  When  a  malefic  Grah  is  in  the  7th  and  some  Grah  in  the  8th,  the  woman  concerned  will 
become  an  ascetic. 

54.  The  woman  dies  before  her  husband,  when  in  her  nativity  there  is  a  benefic  in  the  8th, 
without  aspect  by,  or  association  with  a  malefic. 

55.  If  at  the  birth  of  a  woman  there  are  equal  number  of  benefic s  and  malefics  and  they 
possess  the  same  strength,  she  without  doubt  will  leave  for  her  heavenly  abode  along  with  her 
husband. 

Ch.  81.  Effects  of  Characteristic  Features  of  Parts  of 
Woman's  body. 


1-2.  Maitreya  said.  O  Venerable  Sage!  I  have  been  fully  enlightened  by  the  auspicious  and 
inauspicious  effects,  described  by  you  with  reference  to  the  Janm  Lagn  in  a  female's 
horoscope.  Now  I  request  you  to  favour  me  with  knowledge  of  auspicious  and  inauspicious 
effects  with  reference  to  the  characteristic  features  of  the  various  parts  of  a  woman's  body. 
Maharishi  Parasara  replied.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  will  tell  you  what  Lord  Shiva  narrated  to 
Goddess  Parvati  in  this  regard. 

3-4.  A  woman,  whose  soles  are  even,  smooth,  soft,  well  developed,  warm  and  shining  in  pink 
colour,  without  much  perspiration,  will  be  enjoying  full  happiness,  befitting  her  sex.  The  one, 
whose  soles  are  without  pink  colour,  hard,  dry,  coarse,  uneven,  shaped,  like  a  winnowing 
basket  and  bereft  of  flesh,  will  suffer  misery. 

5-6.  The  woman,  who  has  marks  of  conch,  Swastika,  Chakr,  lotus,  flag,  fish,  umbrella  and  a 
long  line,  rising  upwards  in  her  soles,  becomes  a  queen  and  enjoys  great  happiness  and 
comforts.  The  one,  who  possesses  marks,  like  those  of  snake,  rat  and  crow,  is  bereft  of  wealth 
and  suffers  misery. 

7.  The  girl,  whose  nails  of  toes  are  shining  in  pink  colour,  smooth,  raised  and  round,  enjoys 
great  happiness  and  comforts.  Blackish  and  torn  nails  denotes  misery. 

8.  Raised,  full,  well  developed,  smooth  and  round  great  toe  indicates  happiness.  The  one, 
which  is  small,  irregular  in  shape  and  flat,  denotes  misery. 

9.  The  woman's  toes,  which  are  soft,  thick,  round  and  well  developed  are  considered 
auspicious.  If  the  toes  are  long,  she  will  be  of  loose  morals.  Thin  toes  indicate  poverty. 

10-16.  Other  effects  about  the  toes  are,  as  under.  Short  -  short  life.  Short  and  long  and 
irregular  in  shape  -  procurer  and  guileful.  Flat  -  maid-servant.  Spaced  more  than  average  - 
bereft  of  wealth.  Toes,  overlapping  one  over  the  other  -  widow  and  dependent  on  others.  If 
dust  is  thrown  up,  when  she  walks  -  unchaste  and  brings  defame  to  all  the  three  families  (her 
father's,  mother's  and  husband's).  If  the  smallest  toe  does  not  touch  the  ground  -  she  will 
destroy  her  husband  and  marry  another;  If  the  middle  toe  and  the  one  next  to  it  does  not  touch 
the  ground  -  widow.  First  toe  (next  to  great  toe)  longer  than  the  great  toe  -  she  will  develop 
illicit  connection  with  a  man  before  marriage  and  will  be  of  loose  morals. 

17.  If  the  back  of  the  feet  of  a  woman  is  raised,  without  perspiration,  soft  and  smooth,  she  will 
become  a  queen.  If  the  indications  are  contrary,  she  will  be  poverty-stricken.  She  will  be  fond 
of  travelling,  if  the  back  part  of  the  feet  be  veined.  Hair  on  that  portion  of  feet  denote,  that  she 
will  be  a  maid  servant.  If  the  feet  be  bony,  or  without  flesh,  she  will  have  a  defective  sexual 
organ. 

18.  If  the  heels  are  even,  the  woman  concerned  will  have  a  well  formed  and  desirable  sexual 
organ.  If  the  heels  be  stout,  she  will  have  a  defective  sexual  organ.  If  the  heels  be  high,  she 
will  be  unchaste.  Long  heels  indicate  misery. 

19.  Legs  (portion  below  knees).  Even,  smooth,  evenly  shaped,  round,  without  hair,  good 
looking  and  without  veins  showing  up  are  Rasis,  that  the  woman  will  be  a  queen. 

20.  Round,  smooth,  firm  knees  are  auspicious  indications.  If  the  knees  be  bony,  the  woman 
concerned  will  be  of  loose  moral  character.  If  the  knees  be  loose,  she  will  be  poverty-stricken. 


21.  If  the  thighs  are  round,  like  the  trunk  of  an  elephant,  close  to  each  other,  soft  and  without 
hair,  the  woman  concerned  will  be  a  queen.  If  the  thighs  are  flat  and  hairy,  she  will  be 
poverty-stricken  and  a  widow. 

22-23.  Waist.  Circumference  equal  to  the  width  of  24  fingers  with  well  developed  hips 
indicate,  that  the  woman  will  be  fortunate.  A  waist,  which  is  flat,  long,  without  flesh,  caved 
in,  or  hairy,  forebodes  widowhood  and  misery. 

24.  Raised,  fleshy  and  widespread  hips  in  a  woman  are  auspicious  in  effects.  If  they  are 
contrary,  they  indicate  inauspiciousness. 

25-27.  Sexual  organ.  Hidden  clitoris,  pink-coloured,  curved,  like  the  back  of  a  tortoise,  soft, 
hairy,  shaped,  like  the  leaf  of  a  Pipal  tree  and  smooth  is  highly  auspicious.  If  shaped,  like  the 
feet  of  a  deer,  or  opening  of  an  oven  with  hard  hair  and  with  raised  clitoris,  it  indicates  evil.  If 
the  left  side  of  the  sexual  organ  of  a  woman  is  raised,  she  will  beget  more  female  children 
and,  if  the  right  side  is  raised,  more  boys.  If  the  organ  is  shaped,  like  a  conch,  she  will  be 
barren. 

28.  Portion  below  the  navel.  A  soft,  spread  out  and  slightly  raised  Vasti  is  auspicious.  Hairy, 
veins,  showing  up  and  full  of  lines  (folds,  or  wrinkles)  indicates  inauspiciousness. 

29.  A  navel  deep  with  right  turns  is  productive  of  good  effects.  The  navel  raised,  with  left 
turns  and  with  knots  is  inauspicious. 

30-31.  A  stomach  well  spread  indicates  a  well  formed  sexual  organ  and  many  sons.  If  the 
stomach  of  a  woman  resembles  that  of  a  frog,  her  son  will  become  a  king.  If  a  woman  has  a 
raised  stomach  she  will  be  childless.  If  the  stomach  is  wrinkled,  she  will  become  an  ascetic.  If 
it  has  circular  folds,  she  will  become  a  maid-servant. 

32.  If  the  portion,  covering  the  ribs,  is  even,  well  developed  and  soft,  auspicious  effects  may 
be  expected.  It  will  be  inauspicious,  if  it  is  raised,  hairy  and  full  of  veins. 

33.  The  chest  of  a  woman,  which  is  even  and  hairless  is  auspicious.  Wide  spread  and  hairy 
chest  is  inauspicious. 

34-36.  The  breasts  of  a  woman  signify  good  luck,  if  they  are  of  equal  size,  fleshy,  round  and 
firm,  but  close  together.  They  are  unlucky,  if  they  are  thick  in  front,  are  not  close  together  and 
without  flesh.  Raised  right  breast  indicates,  that  she  will  have  sons.  Raised  left  breast 
indicates,  that  she  will  have  daughters.  If  the  portion,  surrounding  the  nipples,  is  round,  good- 
looking  and  blackish,  she  will  enjoy  good  luck.  Pressed  in  and  unusually  small  breasts 
indicate  bad  luck. 

37.  Shoulders.  Even,  well  built  up  and  without  joints  showing  up  are  Rasis  of  good  luck. 
Raised,  hairy  and  without  flesh  are  unlucky. 

38.  The  armpits,  if  soft,  with  thin  hair,  well  developed  and  smooth  are  auspicious.  Those, 
which  are  deep,  without  flesh,  perspiring  and  with  veins,  showing  up  are  inauspicious. 


39-40.  Arms,  in  which  the  bones  do  not  show  up  and  which  are  soft  jointed,  hairless  without 
obvious  veins,  straight  and  round  are  auspicious.  Those  without  flesh,  hairy,  small,  with 
obvious  veins  and  irregular  in  shape  are  inauspicious. 

41.  If  the  thumbs  of  the  woman  are  shaped,  like  a  lotus  bud,  they  are  auspicious.  If  they  are 
without  flesh  and  irregular  in  shape,  they  are  inauspicious. 

42-43.  If  the  palms  of  the  woman  are  pink-coloured,  raised  in  the  middle,  with  fingers  close 
together  (with  no  holes  between  them),  soft  and  have  very  few  lines,  she  enjoys  happiness  and 
all  comforts.  If  the  palms  are  full  of  lines,  she  will  become  a  widow.  If  there  are  no  lines,  she 
will  be  poverty-stricken.  If  the  veins  show  up  in  the  palms,  she  will  live  on  alms. 

44.  If  the  backs  of  the  hands  of  a  woman  are  well  built,  soft  and  hairless,  she  will  enjoy 
auspicious  effects.  It  will  be  otherwise,  if  the  backs  of  the  hands  are  with  veins,  showing  up, 
deep  and  hairy. 

45-47.  Lines  on  the  palm.  A  woman  enjoys  happiness  and  all  comforts,  if  there  is  a  clearly 
marked,  pink-coloured,  circular,  smooth,  full  and  deep  line  (perhaps  line  of  life  is  meant).  If 
there  is  mark  of  a  fish,  she  will  be  very  lucky.  She  will  be  wealthy  with  mark  of  Swastika.  She 
will  be  a  queen  with  mark  of  a  lotus.  She  will  be  the  mother  of  a  king,  if  she  has  marks  of 
conch,  umbrella  and  tortoise. 

48-50.  The  woman,  who  has  lines,  forming  the  shapes  of  a  balance,  elephant,  bull,  or  horse, 
becomes  the  wife  of  a  businessman.  The  woman,  who  has  lines,  forming  the  shape  of  a  house, 
or  Vajra  is  lucky  and  gives  birth  to  a  son,  who  becomes  learned  in  Shastras.  The  woman,  who 
has  lines,  forming  the  shapes  of  a  chariot,  a  plough,  or  a  yoke,  becomes  the  wife  of  a  farmer. 
She  will  become  a  queen,  if  she  has  lines,  forming  the  shape  of  Chamar,  Ankush,  trident, 
sword,  mace,  Shakti,  or  trumpet. 

51-52.  If  in  the  palm  of  a  woman  there  is  a  line,  which,  starting  from  the  root  of  the  thumb 
goes  up  to  the  root  of  the  little  finger,  she  becomes  a  widow.  If  there  are  lines,  forming  the 
shape  of  a  crow,  a  frog,  a  jackal,  a  wolf,  a  scorpion,  a  snake,  a  donkey,  a  camel  and  a  cat,  the 
woman  concerned  suffers  misery. 

53-54.  If  the  fingers  of  a  woman  are  tender  with  good-looking  phalanges,  tapering  at  the  end 
and  without  hair,  they  are  considered  auspicious.  If  they  are  very  small,  without  flesh, 
irregular,  widely  spaced,  with  hair  and  with  more  than  usual  phalanges,  or  without  phalanges, 
they  indicate  misery. 

55.  If  the  nails  of  the  fingers  are  pink-coloured,  raised  and  shaped  well  at  the  top,  they  are 
auspicious.  Depressed,  dirty-looking,  or  yellow,  or  white-coloured  nails,  or  nails  with  spots 
are  inauspicious. 

56.  If  the  back  of  the  woman  is  fleshy  and  well  developed  with  flesh,  it  is  auspicious.  The 
back  with  hair,  irregular  in  built  and  with  veins  showing  up  is  inauspicious. 

57-58.  The  neck  of  a  woman  with  three  lines  (folds),  with  bones  not  obvious,  round,  well 
developed  and  tender  is  auspicious.  A  thick  necked  woman  becomes  a  widow.  An  irregularly 
built  neck  indicates,  that  the  woman  concerned  will  become  a  maid-servant.  Flat  necked 
woman  will  be  barren.  A  woman  with  a  small  neck  is  childless. 


59.  A  straight,  well  developed,  somewhat  raised  throat  is  auspicious.  One  without  flesh,  with 
veins  obvious,  with  hair  and  irregular  in  built  is  inauspicious. 

60.  Pink-coloured,  tender  and  firm  chin  is  auspicious.  A  broad  chin  with  hair  and  clefts  is 
unlucky. 

61.  Raised,  firm  and  round  cheeks  are  auspitious.  The  ones,  which  are  hard-skinned, 
depressed  and  without  flesh  are  indicative  of  misfortune. 

62.  If  the  mouth  of  a  woman  is  of  normal  size,  firm,  round,  emitting  fragrance,  smooth  and 
good-looking,  it  is  indicative  of  good  luck.  If  otherwise,  it  will  be  inauspicious. 

63-65.  If  the  lower  lip  of  a  woman  is  red,  like  a  lotus,  smooth,  divided  in  the  middle  and  good 
looking,  she  becomes  a  queen.  If  it  be  without  flesh,  coarse,  long,  dry  and  blackish,  it  is 
indicative  of  misery  and  widowhood.  If  the  upper  lip  of  a  woman  is  pink-coloured,  smooth 
and  slightly  raised  in  the  middle,  it  is  indicative  of  happiness  and  good  fortune.  If  otherwise,  it 
will  be  inauspicious. 

66-67.  A  woman,  whose  teeth  are  smooth,  milk  white,  32  in  number  and  whose  upper  and 
lower  teeth,  though  equal  in  size,  are  slightly  raised,  will  be  lucky.  If  lower  teeth  are  more  in 
number,  are  yellow,  or  black-coloured,  fierce  looking,  widely  spaced  and  double,  they  are 
indicative  of  misfortune. 

68-69.  If  the  tongue  of  a  woman  is  red  and  soft,  she  enjoys  great  happiness  and  comforts. 
Caved  in  the  middle  and  spread  out  in  front  indicates  misery.  White  tongue  indicates  death  in 
water.  Dark  tongue  indicates  quarrelsome  nature.  Thick  tongue  denotes  poverty.  Long  tongue 
denotes  one,  who  is  omnivorous.  Long  and  broad  tongue  denotes  lunacy. 

70-71.  Palate  red,  like  lotus,  soft  and  smooth  -  good  luck,  white  -  widowhood,  yellow  - 
ascetism,  black  -  barrenness,  dry  -  large  family. 

72.  When  a  woman  laughs,  if  her  cheeks  are  raised  and  teeth  are  not  visible,  she  will  be  lucky. 
If  it  is  otherwise,  she  will  not  be  lucky. 

73-74.  If  the  nose  of  a  woman  is  evenly  round  and  has  small  nostrils,  it  is  auspicious.  If  the 
nose  is  thick  in  its  front  part  and  flat  in  the  middle,  it  is  inauspicious.  If  the  tip  of  the  nose  is 
red,  or  shrunken,  widowhood  is  indicated.  Flat  nose  indicates  engagement  in  a  menial  job. 
Too  small,  or  too  large  nose  denotes  quarrelsome  nature. 

75-77.  Black  pupils  with  cow's  milk  like  white  portion  of  the  eye,  large  and  broad,  smooth, 
with  black  eyelashes  are  lucky  Rasis.  Raised  eyes  show  short  life.  Round  eyes  denote  loose 
moral  character.  Honey-coloured  eyes  indicate  good  fortune  and  happiness.  The  eyes,  like 
those  of  a  pigeon,  indicate  wickedness.  Eyes,  like  those  of  an  elephant,  indicate  misery.  If  the 
left  eye  is  blind,  adulterous  tendency  will  manifest.  Blindness  of  the  right  eye  indicates 
barrenness. 

78.  A  woman  with  soft,  black,  compact  eyelashes  with  thin  hair  is  fortunate.  Eyelashes  thick, 
scattered  and  with  tawny-coloured  hair  indicate  misery. 


79.  If  the  eyebrows  of  a  woman  are  round,  shaped,  like  a  bow,  smooth,  black,  not  joined  and 
with  soft  hair,  she  is  blessed  with  happiness  and  fame. 

80.  Ears  of  a  woman  long  with  a  round  turn  indicate  children  and  happiness.  Small,  unevenly 
shaped,  very  thin,  with  veins,  showing  up,  cause  her  misery. 

81-82.  The  forehead  of  a  woman  without  veins,  showing  through,  without  hair,  shaped,  like  a 
half-moon,  even,  with  equal  to  three  fingers  are  Rasis  of  a  fortunate  woman,  blessed  with 
husband  and  children.  Rasi  of  Swastika  on  the  forehead  denotes  a  queen.  Very  long,  highly 
raised  and  hairy  forehead  causes  misery. 

83.  Head  of  a  woman  high  and  round,  like  that  of  an  elephant,  is  indicative  of  happiness.  A 
head,  which  is  spread  out,  flat,  big  and  uneven,  indicates  misery. 

84-85.  The  hair  of  a  woman  are  indicative  of  good  fortune.  If  they  are  soft,  black,  long,  thin 
and  yellow,  they  indicate  misfortune.  But  honey-coloured  hair  of  a  fair  complexioned  woman 
and  black  hair  of  a  dark  complexioned  woman  are  also  considered  auspicious.  Most  of  the 
characteristic  features,  described  in  this  chapter,  apply  to  men  also. 

Ch.  82.  Effects  of  Moles,  Marks,  Signs  etc.  for  Men  and 
Women 

I.  Maharishi  Parasara  said.  O  Maitreya!  Now  I  will  describe  to  you  the  effects  of  moles, 
marks,  spots  and  signs,  found  on  the  body  of  women  and  men. 

2-3.  A  mole,  spot,  or  figure,  formed  by  hair  on  the  left  side  of  a  woman  and  right  side  of  a 
man  is  auspicious.  If  there  is  mole  on  the  chest  of  a  woman,  she  will  be  fortunate.  A  woman, 
who  has  a  red  mark,  like  a  mole  etc.,  on  her  right  breast,  begets  many  children  and  she  is 
blessed  with  all  kinds  of  enjoyments  and  comforts. 

4.  The  woman,  who  has  a  red  mark  (mole)  on  her  left  breast,  begets  only  one  son. 

5.  The  woman,  who  has  a  mole  on  her  right  breast,  begets  many  daughters  and  sons. 

6.  There  will  be  gain,  or  acquisition  of  a  kingdom,  if  there,  as  is  a  red  mole  etc.  on  the 
forehead,  or  in  the  middle  of  (between)  the  eyebrows.  The  person  will  enjoy  sweetish 
preparations,  if  there  is  such  a  mark  on  the  cheeks. 

7-10.  The  woman,  who  has  a  red  mark  (mole  etc.)  on  her  nose,  becomes  consort  of  a  king.  If 
the  mark  be  blackish,  the  woman  concerned  becomes  an  adulteress,  or  widow.  All  the  marks 
below  the  navel  are  auspicious  for  both  men  and  women.  If  there  be  moles  etc.  on  the  ears, 
cheeks,  or  neck  of  a  man,  his  first  issue  will  be  male  and  he  will  enjoy  good  fortune  and 
happiness.  The  man,  who  has  moles  etc.  in  the  thighs,  suffers  misery. 

II.  The  woman,  who  has  the  sign  of  trident  on  her  forehead,  becomes  a  queen.  Such  a  mark 
on  the  forehead  of  a  man  makes  him  a  king. 

12.  A  right-turned  circular  hair  formation  on  heart,  navel,  hands,  right  part  of  the  back  and  in 
the  portion  between  sex  organ  and  navel  is  auspicious.  Left-turned  formation  is  inauspicious. 


13-14.  Such  a  hair  formation  on  the  waist  and  private  parts  proves  inauspicious.  If  such  a 
formation  be  on  the  stomach,  the  woman  concerned  will  become  a  widow.  If  it  be  in  the 
center  of  the  back  she  will  become  an  adulteress.  It  will  be  inauspicious,  if  it  be  on  the  neck, 
forehead,  or  center  of  the  head. 

15.  A  man  with  indications  of  short  life  will  get  his  longevity  prolonged  by  marrying  a 
woman  with  auspicious,  or  lucky  marks/symbols. 

Ch.  83.  Effects  of  Curses  in  the  Previous  Birth 

1-3.  Maitreya  said.  O  Venerable  Sage!  You  have  acquainted  me  with  effects,  experienced  by 
men  and  women  in  a  number  of  ways.  According  to  Shastras,  the  soul  of  a  person  does  not 
rest  in  peace  after  his  death,  if  he  is  not  blessed  with  a  son.  What  sin  does  a  person  commit  to 
remain  without  a  son?  And  what  are  the  remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  by  him  to  get  a  son? 
Kindly  enlighten  me  about  this. 

4.  Maharishi  Parasara  replied.  I  will  now  tell  you,  whatever  Lord  Shiva  told  Goddess  Parvati 
in  this  respect. 

5.  Goddess  Parvati  said  to  Lord  Shiva.  O  my  Lord!  What  is  the  sin,  which  causes  destruction 
of  children  amongst  men.  Please  tell  me,  what  are  the  Yogas  for  such  an  effect  and  what  are 
the  remedial  measures  to  protect  the  children? 

6.  Lord  Shiva  replied:  O  Devi!  You  have  asked  a  very  relevant  question.  Now  I  will  tell  you 
the  Yogas  for  loss  of  children  and  the  requisite  remedial  measures. 

7.  A  person  will  be  without  a  son,  if  Guru,  the  Lord  of  Lagn  and  the  Lord  of  the  5th  are  all 
devoid  of  strength. 

8.  The  same  will  happen,  if  Surya,  Mangal,  Rahu  and  Sani,  endowed  with  strength,  be  in  the 
5th  and  the  significator  for  children,  namely  Guru  and  Lord  of  the  5th  etc.  be  bereft  of  strength. 

9-16.  There  will  be  no  male  issue,  due  to  the  curse  of  a  serpent,  if  at  birth  Rahu  is  in  the  5th, 
aspected  by  Mangal;  the  Lord  of  5th  is  associated  with  Rahu  and  Candr  is  in  the  5th  and  is 
aspected  by  Sani;  the  significator  for  children  (Guru)  is  associated  with  Rahu,  the  Lord  of  the 
5th  is  devoid  of  strength  and  the  Lord  of  Lagn  is  with  Mangal;  the  significator  for  children  is 
associated  with  Mangal,  Lagn  is  occupied  by  Rahu  and  the  Lord  of  the  5th  is  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th; 
Budh,  as  Lord  of  the  5th,  being  in  the  Navams  of  Mangal,  is  associated  with  Mangal  and  Lagn 
is  occupied  by  Rahu  and  Gulika;  the  5th  is  Mesh,  or  Vrischik  and  the  Lord  of  the  5th  is 
associated  with  Rahu,  or  Budh;  the  5th  is  occupied  by  Surya,  Sani,  Mangal,  Rahu,  Budh  and 
Guru  and  the  Lords  of  the  5th  and  Lagn  are  devoid  of  strength;  the  Lord  of  Lagn,  or  Guru  is 
associated  with  Rahu  and  the  Lord  of  the  5th  is  in  conjunction  with  Mangal. 

17-19.  Remedial  measures  should  be  adopted  to  obtain  protection  from  the  evil  effects  of  the 
above  Yogas.  These  are  getting  an  idol  of  Naga  (serpent)  Raja,  made  in  gold  and,  after 
worshipping  it  in  accordance  with  prescribed  procedure,  giving  in  charily  a  cow,  some  land, 
sesame  seeds  and  gold  etc.  By  adopting  these  measures  the  Lord  of  Serpents  will  be  gratified 
and  by  his  beneficence  the  person  concerned  will  be  blessed  with  a  son  and  the  lineage  of  his 
family  will  be  prolonged. 


20-30.  There  will  be  no  male  issue,  as  a  result  of  the  curse  of  the  father  in  the  previous  birth, 
if  at  birth  of  the  native  Surya  in  his  debilitation  Rasi  and  in  the  Navams  of  Sani  is  hemmed  in 
between  malefics  in  the  5th  Bhava;  Surya,  as  Lord  of  the  5th,  posited  in  a  Trikon  with  a 
malefic,  is  hemmed  in  between  malefics  and  is  also  aspected  by  a  malefic;  Guru  occupies  the 
Rasi  of  Surya,  the  Lord  of  the  5th  is  with  Surya  and  Lagn  and  the  5th  are  occupied  by  malefics; 
Lord  of  Lagn,  devoid  of  strength,  is  in  the  5l  and  the  Lord  of  the  5th  is  combust  and  Lagn  and 
the  5th  are  occupied  by  malefics;  there  is  exchange  of  Bhavas  between  Lords  of  the  5th  and  the 
10th  and  Lagn  and  the  5th  are  occupied  by  malefics;  Mangal,  as  the  Lord  of  the  10th,  is 
associated  with  the  Lord  of  the  5th  and  Lagn,  the  5th  and  the  10th  are  occupied  by  malefics; 
Lord  of  the  10th  is  in  the  6th,  8th,  or  12th,  Guru  is  in  a  malefic  Rasi  and  the  Lord  of  Lagn  and 
the  5th  are  associated  with  malefics;  Surya,  Mangal  and  Sani  are  in  Lagn  and  the  5th  and  Rahu 
and  Guru  are  in  the  8th  and  the  12th;  Surya  is  in  the  8th,  Sani  in  the  5th,  the  Lord  of  the  5th  is 
associated  with  Rahu  and  Lagn  is  occupied  by  a  malefic;  Lord  of  12th  is  in  Lagn,  Lord  of  8th 
in  5th  and  Lord  of  10th  in  8th;  Lord  of  6tfe  is  in  5th,  Lord  of  10th  in  6th  and  Guru  is  associated 
with  Rahu. 

31-33.  To  get  deliverance  form  the  curse  of  the  father  the  remedial  measures  are  performance 
of  Shraddha  at  Gaya;  to  feed  ten  thousand,  one  thousand,  or  100  Brahmins,  as  one  can  afford; 
Kanyadana  (to  perform  the  marriage  of  a  girl);  giving  a  cow  in  charity.  By  observing  these 
remedial  measures,  the  person  concerned  becomes  free  from  the  curse  and  the  family  lineage 
is  prolonged  by  the  birth  of  sons,  grandsons  etc. 

Note.  In  this  chapter,  where  the  words  'childlessness'  and  'issue-lessness'  are  used,  they 
should  be  interpreted  to  mean  want  of  male  issue,  because  it  is  the  male  issue,  who  by 
performing  the  last  rites  of  his  father  and  mother  ensures  eternal  peace  to  their  souls. 

34-50.  A  person  will  be  without  a  male  issue,  as  a  result  of  curse  of  the  mother,  if  at  birth 
Candr,  as  Lord  of  the  5th  is  in  her  debilitation  Rasi,  or  is  hemmed  in  between  malefics  and  4th 
and  5th  are  occupied  by  malefics;  Sani  is  in  1 1th,  4th  is  occupied  by  malefics  and  Candr  is 
posited  in  the  5l  in  her  debilitation  Rasi;  Lord  of  5th  is  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th,  Lord  of  Lagn  in  his 
debilitation  Rasi  and  Candr  is  associated  with  malefics;  Lord  of  5th  is  in  8th,  6th,  or  12th,  Candr 
in  a  malefic  Navams  and  there  are  malefics  in  Lagn  and  in  5th;  Lord  of  5th  and  Candr, 
associated  with  Sani,  Rahu  and  Mangal,  are  in  5th,  or  9th;  Mangal,  as  Lord  of  4th  is  associated 
with  Sani  and  Rahu  and  5th  and  Lagn  are  occupied  by  Surya  and  Candr,  respectively;  Lords  of 
Lagn  and  5th  are  in  6th,  Lord  of  4th  in  8th  and  Lagn  is  occupied  by  Lord  of  8th  and  10th;  Lagn  is 
occupied  by  the  Lords  of  6th  and  8th,  Lord  of  4th  is  in  12th  and  Candr  and  Guru,  associated  with 
malefics,  are  in  the  5th;  Lagn  is  hemmed  in  between  malefics,  waning  Candr  is  in  7th  and  4th 
and  5th  are  occupied  by  Rahu  and  Sani,  respectively;  there  is  exchange  of  Bhavas  between 
Lords  of  5th  and  8th  and  the  Lord  of  4*  and  Candr  are  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th;  Kark  Lagn  is  occupied 
by  Mangal  and  Rahu  and  Candr  and  Sani  are  in  5th;  Mangal,  Rahu,  Surya  and  Sani  are  in 
Lagn,  5th,  8th  and  12th,  respectively,  and  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and  4th  are  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th; 
Mangal,  Rahu  and  Guru  are  in  8th  and  Sani  and  Candr  are  in  5th.  For  release  from  this  curse 
and  to  beget  a  male  issue  the  person  concerned  should  take  bath  in  the  sea  with  bridge  of 
rocks  between  India  and  Sri  Lanka,  recite  one  Lakh  Gayatri  Mantras,  give  in  charity  things, 
connected  with  evil  Grahas,  feed  Brahmins  and  go  round  a  Pipal  tree  1008  times.  By 
performing  these  remedial  measures,  he  will  not  only  beget  a  son,  the  lineage  of  family  will 
also  be  prolonged. 

51-61.  A  person  will  be  without  a  male  issue,  as  result  of  the  curse  of  the  brother,  if  at  birth 
Lord  of  3rd  with  Rahu  and  Mangal  is  in  5th  and  Lords  of  Lagn  and  5th  are  in  8th;  Lagn  and  5th 


are  occupied  by  Mangal  and  Sani,  respectively,  the  Lord  of  3rd  is  in  9th  and  Mangal,  the 
significator  for  brothers,  is  in  8th;  Guru  in  his  debilitation  Rasi  is  in  3rd,  Sani  in  5th  and  Candr 
and  Mangal  are  in  8th;  Lord  of  Lagn  is  in  12th,  Mangal  in  5th  and  Lord  of  5th,  associated  with  a 
malefic,  in  8th;  Lagn  and  the  5th  are  hemmed  in  between  malefics  and  the  Lord  of  Lagn  and  5th 
are  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th;  the  3rd  is  occupied  by  the  Lord  of  10th  along  with  a  malefic  and  a  benefic 
is  with  Mangal  in  5th;  the  5th  in  a  Rasi  of  Budh  is  occupied  by  Sani  and  Rahu  and  Budh  and 
Mangal  are  in  12th;  the  3rd  is  occupied  by  the  Lord  of  Lagn,  the  Lord  of  3rd  occupies  the  5th 
and  Lagn,  3rd  and  5th  are  with  malefics;  Lord  of  3rd  is  in  8th  and  Guru  is  associated  with  Sani 
in  5th;  Lord  of  8th  is  in  5th  along  with  the  Lord  of  3rd  and  Mangal  and  Sani  are  in  8th. 

62-64.  The  person  concerned  will,  without  doubt,  get  release  from  the  curse,  will  be  blessed 
with  a  son  and  the  prolongation  of  his  family  lineage  will  be  ensured,  if  the  following 
remedial  measures  are  adopted.  He  should  observe  the  Candryana  fast  after  listening  to 
Haribansa  Puran.  He  should  plant  a  sapling  of  Pipal  in  front  of  Saligram  on  the  banks  of  the 
Caveri  river,  or  on  the  Ganga,  or  Mahanadi  and  offer  prayers  to  it.  He  should  give  10  cows  in 
charity  through  his  wife.  He  should  give  in  charity  land  with  mango  trees,  planted  on  it. 

65-68.  A  person  will  be  without  a  male  issue,  as  a  result  of  the  curse  of  the  maternal  uncle,  if 
at  birth  the  5th  is  occupied  by  Budh,  Guru,  Mangal  and  Rahu  and  Sani  is  in  Lagn;  the  5th  is 
occupied  by  the  Lords  of  Lagn  and  of  5th  along  with  Sani,  Mangal  and  Budh;  Lagn  is 
occupied  by  a  combust  Lord  of  6th,  Sani  is  in  7th  and  Lord  of  Lagn  is  associated  with  Budh; 
Lords  of  Lagn  and  4th  are  in  Lagn  and  Candr,  Budh  and  Mangal  are  in  5th. 

69-70.  To  get  release  from  the  curse  and  for  being  blessed  with  a  son  and  for  ensuring  the 
prolongation  of  the  lineage  of  the  family  the  following  remedial  measures  are  to  be  adopted. 
Installation  of  an  idol  of  Lord  Vishnu.  Construction  of  a  deep,  or  ordinary  well,  dam,  or 
reservoir,  or  all  of  them. 

71-78.  If  a  person,  mad  with  power  and  wealth,  insults  a  Brahmin,  he  remains  without  a  male 
issue  in  the  next  birth.  A  person  will  be  without  a  male  issue,  as  a  result  of  the  curse  of  a 
Brahmin,  if  at  birth  Rahu  is  in  Guru's  Rasi  and  Guru  in  5th;  Lord  of  9th  is  in  5th  and  Lord  of  5th 
in  8th  along  with  Guru,  Mangal  and  Rahu;  Lord  of  9th  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi  and  Lord  of 
12th,  associated  with  Rahu,  is  in  5th;  Guru  is  in  his  debilitation  Rasi,  Rahu  in  Lagn,  or  5th  and 
Lord  of  5th  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th;  Lord  of  5th  and  Guru,  associated  with  malefics,  are  in  8th,  or  the 
Lord  of  5th,  associated  with  Surya  and  Candr,  is  in  8th;  Guru,  being  in  the  Navams  of  Sani,  is 
associated  with  Sani  and  Mangal  and  the  Lord  of  5th  is  in  12th;  Guru  is  associated  with  Sani  in 
Lagn  and  Rahu  is  in  9th,  or  Rahu  is  with  Guru  in  12th.  These  are  Yogas,  which  reveal  the  curse 
of  Brahmin  in  the  previous  birth. 

79-81.  To  obtain  relief  from  the  evil  effects  of  the  above  Yogas  the  remedial  measures  are  to 
observe  Candrayana  fast  and  to  do  penance  three  times  and  to  give  in  charity  a  cow  and  five 
gems  with  gold,  after  feeding  Brahmins,  according  to  one's  means  and  giving  them  presents 
in  cash.  Then  the  person  will  be  released  from  the  curse  and  will  be  endowed  with  happiness. 

82-92.  A  person  does  not  beget  a  male  issue,  as  a  result  of  the  curse  of  the  wife,  if  at  birth 
Lord  of  Lagn  is  in  5th,  Sani  in  the  Navams  of  Lord  of  7th  and  Lord  of  5th  in  8th;  Lord  of  7th  is  in 
8th,  Lord  of  12th  in  5th  and  Guru  is  associated  with  a  malefic;  Sukr  is  in  5th,  Lord  of  7th  in  8th 
and  5th  is  occupied  by  a  malefic;  the  2nd  and  5th  are  occupied  by  a  malefic  and  Lord  of  7th  is  in 
8th;  Sukr  is  in  9th,  Lord  of  7th  in  8th  and  Lagn  and  5th  are  occupied  by  malefics;  Sukr  is  Lord  of 
9th,  Lord  of  5th  is  in  an  inimical  Rasi  and  Lord  of  Lagn  and  7th  and  Guru  are  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th; 


the  5th  is  Vrishabh,  or  Tul,  occupied  by  Surya  and  Candr  and  12th,  Lagn  and  2nd  are  occupied 
by  malefics;  Sani  and  Sukr  are  in  7th,  Lord  of  8th  is  in  5th  and  Lagn  is  occupied  by  Surya  and 
Rahu;  Mangal  occupies  2nd,  Guru  is  in  12th  and  Sukr  and  Rahu  are  in  5th;  Lords  of  2nd  and  7th 
are  in  8th,  Mangal  and  Sani  occupy  5th  and  Lagn,  respectively,  and  Guru  is  associated  with  a 
malefic;  Rahu  is  in  Lagn,  Sani  in  5th,  Mangal  in  9th  and  Lords  of  5th  and  7th  are  in  8th. 

93-94.  The  person  concerned  gets  release  from  the  curse  and  is  blessed  with  a  son,  if  he 
performs  the  marriage  of  an  unmarried  girl,  or,  if  such  a  girl  is  not  available,  a  gold  idol  of  the 
Lakshminarayana,  fertile  cow,  a  bed,  ornaments  and  garments  to  a  Brahmin  couple. 

Notes.  According  to  our  view,  'Kanyadana'  does  not  mean  giving  a  girl  in  charily,  but  helping 
in  the  performance  of  the  marriage  of  an  unmarried  girl,  not  his  own  daughter. 

95-105.  If  the  person,  whose  duty  is  to  do  so,  does  not  perform  Shraddha  of  his  father,  or 
mother  in  his  previous  birth,  the  departed  soul  is  formed  into  an  evil  spirit  and  he  is  deprived 
of  a  male  issue  in  the  next  birth.  This  is  revealed  by  the  following  Yogas  at  birth.  Sani  and 
Surya  in  5th,  waning  Candr  in  7th  and  Rahu  and  Guru  in  12th;  Sani,  as  Lord  of  5th  in  8th, 
Mangal  in  Lagn  and  Guru  in  8th;  Malefics  are  in  Lagn,  Surya  in  12th,  Mangal,  Sani  and  Budh 
are  in  5th  and  the  Lord  of  5th  is  in  8th;  Rahu  is  in  Lagn,  Sani  in  5th  and  Guru  in  8th;  Sukr,  Guru 
and  Rahu  are  in  Lagn,  associated  with  Candr  and  Sani  and  the  Lord  of  Lagn  are  in  8th;  Lord  of 
5th  and  Guru  are  in  their  debilitation  Rasis,  aspected  by  debilitated  Grahas;  Sani  is  in  Lagn, 
Rahu  in  5th,  Surya  in  8th  and  Mangal  in  12th;  Lord  of  7th  is  in  6th,  8th,  or  12th,  Candr  is  in  5th, 
Sani  and  Gulika  are  in  Lagn;  Lord  of  8th  along  with  Sani  and  Sukr  is  in  5th  and  Guru  is  in  his 
debilitation  Rasi. 

106-108.  The  person  concerned  gets  release  from  the  curse  and  is  blessed  with  a  son,  if  he 
undertakes  the  following  remedial  measures.  Performance  of  a  Pinda  Dana,  Rudra  Abhisheka, 
giving  in  charity  a  gold  idol  of  Brahma,  a  cow,  a  vessel,  made  of  silver  and  a  Neelamani, 
feeding  Brahmins  and  giving  them  presents  in  cash. 

109-111.  If  a  person  is  deprived  of  a  male  issue,  as  a  result  of  malevolence  of  Grahas  at  birth, 
he  will  be  blessed  with  a  son,  if  he  undertakes  the  following  remedial  measures.  Worshipping 
Lord  Shiva,  if  the  harm  is,  as  a  result  of  the  malevolence  of  Budh  and  Sukr;  reciting  of  Santan 
Gopal  Mantra,  wearing  and  worshipping  appropriate  Yantra  and  taking  suitable  medicines,  if 
the  childlessness  is  a  result  of  the  malevolence  of  Guru  and  Candr;  Kanya  Dana,  if  the 
childlessness  is  due  to  malevolence  of  Rahu;  worshipping  of  Lord  Vishnu,  if  it  is  due  to 
malevolence  of  Surya;  Rudriya  Japa,  if  it  is  due  to  the  malevolence  of  Mangal  and  Sani. 
Listening  with  devotion  to  Haribansh  Puran  removes  all  kinds  of  blemishes  and  blesses  the 
person  concerned  with  a  son. 

Ch.  84.  Remedial  Measures  from  the  Malevolence  of 
Grahas 

1.  Maitreya  said.  O  Venerable  Sage!  Please  describe  for  the  good  of  mankind  the  remedial 
measures  for  appeasement  of  the  malevolent  Grahas. 

2.  The  Sage  replied.  I  have  already  described  the  names  and  characteristic  features  and 
qualities  of  the  Grahas.  Joys  and  sorrows  of  all  the  creatures  in  the  world  are  dependent  on 
these  Grahas.  Therefore  persons  desirous  of  peace,  wealth  and  prosperity,  rainfall,  good 


health  and  longevity  should  worship  the  Grahas  (by  prayers,  recitation  of  Mantras,  charity 
etc.). 

3-5.  For  the  purpose  of  worshipping  them  the  idols  of  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru, 
Sukr,  Sani,  Rahu  and  Ketu  should  be  made  of  copper,  Sphatika  (rock  crystal),  red  sandal 
wood,  gold  (both  Budh  and  Guru),  silver,  iron,  glass  and  bell  metal,  respectively. 
Alternatively  the  sketches  of  all  the  above  Grahas  should  be  drawn  in  the  colours,  belonging 
to  them,  on  a  piece  of  cloth  by  sandal  etc.  and  they  should  be  placed  in  their  own  directions. 

6.  Contemplate  of  Surya  well  adorned  with  two  arms,  seated  on  a  lotus,  with  a  lotus  flower  in 
one  hand,  red-coloured,  like  lotus  and  aboard  a  chariot  of  seven  horses. 

7.  Contemplate  of  Candr  white-coloured,  dressed  in  white  robes,  with  two  arms,  carrying  a 
mace  in  one  hand  and  a  Vara  in  the  other,  adorned  with  white-coloured  ornaments  and  aboard 
a  chariot  often  horses. 

8.  Contemplate  of  Mangal  with  a  red  necklace,  dressed  in  red-coloured  robes,  with  four  arms, 
carrying  Shakti,  Shoola,  Gada  (mace)  and  Vara  and  mounted  on  a  lamb. 

9.  Contemplate  of  Budh  with  a  yellow-coloured  garland,  dressed  in  yellow  robes,  with  four 
arms,  carrying  a  sword,  a  shield,  a  mace  and  Vara,  mounted  on  a  lion. 

10.  Contemplate  of  Guru,  as  yellow  complexion  and  Sukr  of  fair  complexion,  both  with  four 
arms,  carrying  a  Danda,  Akshasutra,  Kamandal  and  Vara. 

11.0  Maitreya!  Contemplate  of  Sani  with  the  lustre,  like  that  of  Indraneela,  with  four  arms, 
carrying  Shoola,  bow,  arrow  and  Vara,  mounted  on  a  donkey. 

12.  Contemplate  of  Rahu  with  a  hideous  face,  with  four  arms,  carrying  a  sword,  a  shield,  a 
Shoola  and  a  Vara,  blue-coloured  and  mounted  on  a  lion. 

13.  There  are  many  Ketus.  All  of  them  are  of  smoky  colour,  with  two  arms,  carrying  a  mace 
and  a  Vara,  with  a  hideous  face  and  mounted  on  a  donkey. 

14.  All  the  idols  should  be  so  made,  that  they  are  108  fingers  tall  by  one's  own  fingers. 

Notes.  Such  a  measurement  is  taken  from  the  middle  finger. 

15-16.  Dedicate  with  devotion  to  the  Grah  concerned  the  flowers  and  garments  of  the  colour, 
belonging  to  him,  sandal,  Deep,  Guggul  etc.,  his  metal  and  the  grains,  dear  to  him  and 
distribute  all  these  things  to  Brahmins  to  appease  the  Grah. 

17-20.  The  Mantras  of  all  the  Grahas  and  the  prescribed  number  of  their  recitation  are  given 
below.  The  recitation  of  Mantras  should  be  done  after  worshipping  the  Grahas,  as  indicated  in 
verses  15-16.  Grah  Mantra  prescribed  number:  Surya  7000,  Candr  1 1000,  Mangal  1 1000, 
Budh  9000,  Guru  19000,  Sukr  16000,  Sani  23000,  Rahu  18000,  Ketu  17000. 

21-22.  Havan  should  be  performed  with  Aak,  Palash,  Khair,  Chirchiri,  Pipal,  Goolar,  Shami 
wood  pieces,  Doob  and  Kush,  for  Surya,  Candr,  Mangal,  Budh,  Guru,  Sukr,  Sani,  Rahu  and 


Ketu,  respectively,  mixed  with  honey,  Ghi,  curd,  or  milk.  The  number  of  offerings  to  the 
sacred  fire  is  108,  or  28. 

23-24.  To  appease  Surya  and  the  other  eight  Grahas  Brahmins  should  be  fed  with  (cream)  of 
rice  cooked  with  jaggery,  rice  cooked  in  milk,  Havishya,  paddy  cooked  in  milk,  curd  and  rice, 
rice  with  Ghi,  rice  cooked  with  powder  of  sesame  seeds,  rice  cooked  with  meat,  rice  cooked 
with  cereals,  respectively. 

25.  To  appease  Surya  and  other  Grahas  the  things  to  be  given  in  charily  are  cow  with  calf, 
conch,  bullock,  gold,  robes,  horse,  black  cow,  weapons  made  of  iron  and  goat,  respectively. 

26-27.  The  Grah,  who  is  the  cause  of  adverse  effects  to  a  person  at  any  time,  should  be 
handled  by  worship  and  appeasing  (of  the  benevolent  ones),  because  Brahma  has  blessed  the 
Grahas  with  the  boon  "Do  to  the  persons,  who  worship  you".  And  the  development  and 
progress  and  downfall  of  the  people  and  the  creation  and  destruction  of  the  universe  are  all 
under  the  administration  and  authority  of  the  Grahas.  Therefore  they  are  most  venerable. 

Ch.  85.  Inauspicious  Births 

1-4.  The  Venerable  Sage  said.  O  Maitreya!  Now  I  will  describe  to  you  the  circumstances,  in 
which  the  births  are  inauspicious  in  spite  of  Lagn  and  the  Grahas  being  well  disposed. 
Although  Lagn  may  be  well  disposed,  births  will  be  inauspicious,  if  they  take  place  on 
Amavasya  (last  day  of  the  Krishna  Paksha),  on  Chaturdasi  (14th  Tithi),  in  Krishna  Paksha 
(dark  half  of  the  month),  in  Bhadra  Karan,  in  the  Nakshatr  of  the  brother,  in  the  Nakshatras  of 
father  and  mother,  at  the  time  of  entry  of  Surya  in  a  Rasi,  the  time  of  Pata,  at  the  time  of  solar 
and  lunar  eclipses,  at  the  time  of  Vyati  Pata,  in  Gandantas  of  all  the  three  kinds,  in 
Yamaghant,  Tithikshaya,  in  Dagdha  Yog  etc.  The  birth  of  a  son  after  three  daughters  and  birth 
of  a  daughter  after  three  sons  and  the  birth  of  a  freak  are  inauspicious.  But  there  are  remedial 
measures  for  obtaining  relief  from  the  evil  effects  of  such  births,  which  are  being  described  in 
the  following  chapters. 

Ch.  86.  Remedies  for  Amavasya  Birth 

1-9.  The  Sage  Parasara  said.  O  Maitreya!  The  person,  born  on  Amavasya,  is  always  poverty 
stricken.  It  is  therefore  essential  to  adopt  remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  the  evil 
effects  of  such  births,  which  are,  as  follows.  Take  a  Kalash  (water  vessel)  and  then  put  in  it 
fresh  leaves  of  Goolar  (wild  fig),  Vata  (banyan),  Pipal,  mango  and  Neema  (mango)  trees  and 
cover  it  with  two  pieces  of  cloth.  Then  install  the  Kalash  in  the  South-West  direction  after 
reciting  . . .  etc.  and  . . .  etc.  Mantras.  Then  worship  the  idols  of  Surya  and  Candr,  ruling  deities 
of  Amavasya,  made  of  gold  and  silver,  mixed  with  copper,  respectively,  by  recitation  of . . . 
etc.  Mantras  for  Surya  and  . . .  etc.  Mantras  for  Candr  16,  or  5  times.  Thereafter  perform 
Havan  with  108,  or  28  oblations  of  the  mixture  of  prescribed  fuels  (...)  and  cooked  food 
(Charu)  with  recitation  of  Mantras  of  Surya  and  Candr.  Later  sprinkle  the  water  on  the  child, 
that  is  born  and  his  parents  and  offer  in  charily  gold,  silver  and  a  black  cow  together  with 
feeding  the  Brahmins,  according  to  one's  means.  By  performing  these  remedial  rites  the  child 
born  gains  freedom  and  protection  from  the  evil  effects  of  the  birth  on  Amavasya. 

Ch.  87.  Remedies  from  Birth  on  Krishna  Chaturdashi 


1-3.  The  Sage  said.  Divide  the  span  of  Chaturdashi  in  6  parts.  The  birth  in  the  first  part  is 
auspicious.  Second  part  causes  destruction,  or  death  of  father.  Third  part  causes  death  of  the 
mother.  Fourth  part  takes  away  the  maternal  uncle.  Fifth  part  destroys  the  entire  family 
(Khula  -  generation).  Sixth  part  causes  loss  of  wealth,  or  destruction  (death)  of  the  native. 
Therefore  it  is  essential  to  take  immediate  remedial  measures  to  escape  these  evil  effects. 

4-5.  Have  an  idol  of  Lord  Shiva,  made  of  one  Karsha  (equal  in  weight  to  the  former  silver 
Rupee)  of  gold,  or  of  weight  one  can  afford.  The  idol  should  have  a  New  Moon  on  the 
forehead,  have  a  white  garland  round  the  neck,  have  three  eyes  (one  being  on  the  forehead), 
be  dressed  in  white  robes,  be  seated  on  a  bull,  be  two-armed  and  carry  Vara  and  Abhaya. 

6-13.  Then  after  invocation  with  Varun  Mantra  worship  should  be  performed  by  chanting  . . . 
etc.  Mantras.  Thereafter  a  Kalash  should  be  placed  in  the  North-East  direction  with  chanting 
of  'Imah  Mai  Varun',  'Tan  Tva  Yami',  'Tvan  Nai  Agni'  Mantras,  followed  by  Japa  of  . . .  etc. 
and  'Bhadra  Agni  . . . '  Suktas  and  the  chanting  of  . . .  Mantra.  Then,  after  sprinkling  water  over 
the  idol  of  Lord  Shiva  (Abhisheka),  the  nine  Grahas  should  be  worshipped.  This  should  be 
followed  by  Havan,  by  using  Ghl,  powder  of  sesame  seeds,  Urda,  Sarson  and  wood  pieces  of 
Pipal,  Pakar,  Palas  and  Khadir  trees.  108,  or  28  oblations  should  be  made  separately  for  the 
nine  Grahas.  Thereafter,  along  with  chanting  of . . .  etc.  Mantras,  Havan  should  be  performed 
with  sesame  seeds  for  the  nine  Grahas.  Lastly  the  water  of  the  Kalash  should  be  sprinkled  on 
the  native  and  his  parents  and  the  Brahmins  should  be  fed,  according  to  means. 

Ch.  88.  Remedies  from  Birth  in  Bhadra  and  Inauspicious 
Yogas 

1-2.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  Now  I  am  going  to  describe  the  remedial  measures  for  relief 
from  the  evil  effects  of  birth  in  Bhadra,  Tithi  Kshaya,  Vyatipata,  Paridha,  Vajra  etc. 
inauspicious  Yogas  and  Yamaghants  etc.  The  remedial  rites  should  be  performed  on  the  day, 
when  the  same  inauspicious  Yog  operates  again. 

3-5.  The  remedial  rites  are  to  be  performed  in  the  following  order  by  the  parents  of  the  child 
in  the  above  inauspicious  Yogas.  Puja  of  Lord  Vishnu  and  other  deities  on  an  auspicious  day 
and  auspicious  Lagn  on  the  advice  of  a  proficient  Jyotishi,  burning  of  Deep  with  Ghl  in  a 
Shiva  temple,  Abhisheka  of  Lord  Shiva,  going  round  a  Pipal  tree  108  times  prolongs 
longevity  and  perform  Havan  with  108  oblations  along  with  the  recital  of '  Vaisneh 
Raratmachityadhi'  Mantra  of  Lord  Vishnu  and  feeding  Brahmins  to  the  best  of  one's  means. 
The  observance  of  these  remedial  measures  will  give  deliverance  to  the  native  from  all  the 
evil  effects  of  his  inauspicious  birth  and  he  will  enjoy  happiness. 

Ch.  89.  Remedies  from  Nakshatr  Birth 

1-7.  The  Sage  Parasara  said.  O  Maitreya!  If  the  birth  takes  place  in  the  Nakshatras  of  the 
brother  and  the  parents,  death  takes  place,  without  doubt,  of  the  brother  and  the  father,  or 
mother,  or  they  have  to  undergo  death-like  suffering.  Therefore  I  am  going  to  describe  the 
remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  to  escape  from  these  evil  effects.  The  remedial  rites  should 
be  performed  in  a  Muhurta,  when  Candr  and  stars  are  favourable  on  a  day,  on  which  there  is 
no  Rikta-Bhadra  Dosha.  The  remedial  rites  should  be  performed  in  the  following  order.  Instal 
an  idol  of  the  Janm  Nakshatr  on  a  Kalash  in  the  North-East  direction  from  the  fire.  Cover  it 
with  a  red  piece  of  cloth  and  then  warp  two  pieces  of  cloth  round  it.  Worship  the  idol  by 


chanting  the  Mantras  of  the  Janm  Nakshatr.  According  to  one's  Gotra,  perform  Havan  108 
times  with  the  recitation  of  the  same  Mantra,  facing  the  fire,  with  Ghl  and  other  Havan 
material.  Then  the  priest,  performing  the  Puja,  should  sprinkle  water  on  the  parents  and 
brother  (whoever  is  concerned).  Give  presents  in  cash  (Dakshena)  to  the  priest  and  his 
colleagues,  associated  with  the  ceremony,  to  the  best  of  one's  means  and  then  feed  the 
Brahmins  to  the  best  of  one's  means. 

Ch.  90.  Remedies  from  Sankranti  Birth 

1-2.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  The  names  of  the  Sankranti  on  the  seven  days  of  the  week, 
beginning  from  Sunday,  are  Ghora,  Dhavankshi,  Mahodari,  Manda,  Mandakini,  Mishra  and 
Rakshasi.  The  person,  born  at  the  Sankranti  (entry  of  Surya  in  a  new  Rasi),  is  poor  and 
unhappy,  but  he  becomes  well-to-do  and  happy,  if  remedial  measures  are  undertaken.  I  am 
now  going  to  describe  the  remedial  measures  to  nullify  these  evil  effects. 

3-6.  The  Yagya  of  the  nine  Grahas  should  be  performed  to  obtain  relief  from  the  evil  effects 
of  the  birth  at  Sankranti.  A  clean  spot  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  house  should  be  purified  by 
besmearing  with  cow  dung.  Then  prepare  three  separate  heaps  of  the  following:  5  Dronas  (80 
Seers)  of  paddy  (Sadhi),  2V2  Dronas  (40  Seers)  of  rice,  VA  Dronas  (20  Seers)  of  sesame  seeds 
(Til).  On  these  heaps  of  grains  make  a  figure  of  lotus  with  eight  leaves  (Ashtamdhal)  and  then 
decorate  them  with  flowers.  After  doing  this,  select  and  invite  a  priest,  who  is  well  versed  in 
the  performance  of  religious  rites  and  recitation  of  Mantras. 

7-18.  The  religious  rites  are  then  to  be  performed  in  the  following  order.  Install  Kalashas 
without  any  holes  on  all  the  three  heaps  and  put  in  each  of  them  water  from  holy  places, 
Saptamrattika,  Shataushadhi,  Panchapallava  and  Panchagavya.  Then  wrap  the  Kalashas  with 
pieces  of  cloth.  Place  small  earthen  pots,  wrapped  with  thin  cloth,  on  the  Kalashas.  Then 
install  the  idol  of  Sankranti  along  with  the  idol  of  Adhideva  and  Pratyadhideva.  (Here  Surya 
is  Adhideva  and  Candr  Pratyadhideva).  Their  idols  should  be  placed  on  either  side  of  the  main 
idols  of  Sankranti.  Two  robes  may  be  given,  as  offering  to  each  of  the  idols.  Perform  worship 
of  all  the  three  idols,  according  to  the  prescribed  procedure.  The  main  idol  should  be 
worshipped  with  the  chanting  of  'Trayambakam',  '  Yajam  Hai'  etc.,  the  idol  of  Surya  with 
Mantra  'Ut  Surya'  and  the  idol  of  Candr  with  Mantra  'Apayayashava'  etc.  The  worship 
should  be  performed  with  Shodshopchar,  or  Panchopchar,  as  may  be  possible.  After  touching 
the  main  idol,  Mrityunjaya  Japa  should  be  recited  1008,  108,  or  28  times,  as  may  be  possible. 
Make  a  small  platform  in  the  West  of  the  installed  Kalashas,  kindle  fire  on  it  and  perform  the 
prescribed  rites.  Then  perform  Havan  1008,  108,  or  28  times  with  Samidha,  Ghrit  (Ghl)  and 
Charu  (powder  of  Til)  within  one's  means  along  with  chanting  of  'Trayambakam'  etc. 
Mantra.  8)  Again  perform  Havan,  first  with  the  fuel  of  sesame  seeds  along  with  recitation  of 
Mrityunjaya  Mantra.  After  performing  another  Svistkrita  Havan,  sprinkle  the  holy  water  on 
the  child  born  and  his  parents.  Lastly  feed  as  many  Brahmins,  as  one  can  afford.  By 
performing  the  remedial  rites,  described  above,  the  evil  effects  are  nullified  and  the  native  and 
his  parents  enjoy  happiness. 

Ch.  91.  Remedies  for  Birth  in  Eclipses 

1-14.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  A  person,  whose  birth  takes  place  at  the  time  of  solar,  or 
lunar  eclipse,  suffers  from  ailments,  distress  and  poverty  and  faces  danger  of  death.  Therefore 
I  am  going  to  describe  for  the  benefit  of  the  mankind  the  remedial  measures,  required  to  be 


undertaken  to  nullify  the  above  evil  effects.  The  remedial  rites  are  to  be  performed  in  the 
following  order.  The  following  idols  should  be  got  prepared,  according  to  one's  means:  in 
gold  an  idol  of  the  deity  of  the  Nakshatr,  in  which  the  eclipse  takes  place  (regarding  deities  of 
Nakshatras,  see  'notes'  of  verse  18,  Ch.  3,  Vol.  I);  in  gold  an  idol  of  Surya,  if  the  birth  takes 
place  during  solar  eclipse;  in  silver  an  idol  of  Candr,  if  the  birth  takes  place  during  lunar 
eclipse;  in  lead  an  idol  of  Rahu.  Besmear  a  clean  spot  on  the  ground  (in  the  house)  with  cow 
dung,  cover  it  with  a  new  (unused)  beautiful  piece  of  cloth  and  install  the  three  idols  on  it. 
Make  offerings  of  the  following  to  the  idols:  in  case  of  birth  during  solar  eclipse  all  things 
dear  to  Surya  and  red-coloured  Akshat  (Akshata  -  rice),  red  sandal,  a  garland  of  red-coloured 
flowers,  red  clothes  etc.;  in  case  of  birth  during  a  lunar  eclipse  all  things  dear  to  Candr  and 
white  sandal,  white  flowers,  white  clothes  etc.;  for  Rahu  blackish  clothes,  blackish  flowers 
etc.;  white  flowers  for  the  deity  of  the  Nakshatr,  in  which  the  eclipse  takes  place.  The  worship 
should  be  performed,  as  follows:  of  Surya  with  the  chanting  of '  Akrishnim'  etc.  Mantra;  of 
Candr  with  the  chanting  of  'Imadeva'  etc.  Mantra;  of  Rahu  with  Durva  (a  kind  of  grass)  and 
with  the  chanting  of  'Kayanshicatra'  etc.  Mantra.  Thereafter  Havan  should  be  performed,  as 
follows:  with  the  fuel  of  Aak  wood  pieces  for  Surya;  with  the  fuel  of  Palas  tree  wood  pieces 
for  Candr;  with  Durva  for  Rahu;  with  Pipal  tree  wood  pieces  for  the  deity  of  the  Nakshatr. 
Sprinkle  the  holy  water  of  the  Kalash  on  the  child  born  (and  his  parents).  Offer  worshipful 
regards  to  the  priest,  performing  the  remedial  rites  and  lastly  feed  as  many  Brahmins,  as 
possible  within  one's  means.  By  performance  of  the  remedial  rites  in  the  manner  described 
above,  evil  effects  of  the  inauspicious  birth  are  wiped  and  the  native  enjoys  happiness  and  is 
blessed  with  good  fortune. 

Ch.  92.  Remedies  from  Gandanta  Birth 

1.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  Gandanta  is  of  three  kinds,  namely  of  Tithi,  Nakshatr  and  Lagn. 
Birth,  travelling  and  performance  of  auspicious  functions,  like  marriage  etc.,  during  Gandanta 
are  likely  to  cause  death  of  the  person  concerned. 

2.  O  Maitreya!  The  last  2  Ghatikas  of  Purna  Tithi  (5th,  10th,  15th)  and  the  first  2  Ghatikas  of 
Nanda  Tithi  (1st,  6th,  1 1th)  are  known,  as  Tithi  Gandanta. 

3.  Similarly  the  last  two  Ghatikas  of  Revati  and  first  two  Ghatikas  of  Ashvini,  the  last  two 
Ghatikas  of  Aslesha  and  first  two  Ghatikas  of  Magha  and  the  last  two  Ghatikas  of  Jyeshtha 
and  first  two  Ghatikas  of  Mula  are  known,  as  Nakshatr  Gandanta. 

4.  The  last  half  Ghatika  of  Meen  and  first  half  Ghatika  of  Mesh,  the  last  half  Ghatika  of  Kark 
and  first  half  Ghatika  of  Simh,  the  last  half  Ghatika  of  Vrischik  and  first  half  Ghatika  of 
Dhanu  are  known,  as  Lagn  Gandanta. 

5.  Amongst  these  Gandantas  the  last  6  Ghatikas  of  Jyeshtha  and  first  8  Ghatikas  of  Mula  are 
known,  as  Abhukta  Mula. 

6-8.  Now  I  will  tell  you  the  remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  to  release  the  child,  born  during 
Gandanta,  from  its  evil  effects.  The  father  should  see  the  child  born  only  on  the  morning  next 
to  the  end  of  the  days  of  Sutaka,  or  on  any  auspicious  day  after  the  performance  of  the 
remedial  measures.  The  remedial  measures  are  giving  a  bullock  in  charily  in  the  case  of  Tithi 
Gandanta,  giving  a  cow  with  calf  in  charity  in  the  case  of  Nakshatr  Gandanta,  giving  gold  in 
charity  in  the  case  of  Lagn  Gandanta,  performing  Abhisheka  of  the  child  along  with  father,  if 


the  birth  is  in  the  first  part  of  Gandanta  and  along  with  mother,  if  the  birth  is  in  the  second 
part  of  Gandanta. 

9-11.  Performance  of  Puja  on  the  holy  Kalash  of  the  idol  of  the  deities  of  Tithi  (in  case  of 
Tithi  Gandanta),  Nakshatr  (in  case  of  Nakshatr  Gandanta)  and  Lagn  (in  case  of  Lagn 
Gandanta),  made  of  16  Masas,  8  Masas,  or  4  Masas  of  gold,  as  may  be  possible,  followed  by 
Havan  and  Abhisheka,  according  to  procedure  already  described  earlier.  At  the  end  as  many 
Brahmins,  as  may  be  possible  within  one's  means,  should  be  fed.  These  remedial  measures 
will  ensure  long  life,  good  health  and  prosperity  for  the  child. 

Notes.  Unless  one  is  himself  fully  conversant  with  the  performance  of  religious  rites,  the 
remedies,  recommended  in  this  chapter,  earlier  and  later  chapters,  should  be  got  performed  by 
and  under  the  directions  of  a  learned  priest,  because  the  full  effects  will  be  derived,  if  the  rites 
are  performed  correctly  and  according  to  the  procedure,  prescribed  in  the  religious  scriptures 
on  this  subject. 

Ch.  93.  Remedies  for  Abhukta  Mula  Birth 

1-2.  The  Sage  Parasara  said.  The  ruling  deity  of  Jyeshtha  is  Indra  and  the  ruling  deity  of  Mula 
is  Rakshasa.  As  both  the  deities  are  inimical  to  each  other,  this  Gandanta  is  considered,  as  the 
most  evil.  A  boy,  or  girl,  born  during  the  period  of  Abhukta  Mula,  should  either  be 
abandoned,  or  the  father  should  not  see  the  face  of  the  child  for  8  years.  Now  I  shall  describe 
the  remedial  measures  to  obtain  deliverence  from  the  evil  effects  of  birth  during  this 
extremely  inauspicious  period. 

3-4.  In  view  of  the  extremely  inauspicious  effects  of  birth  during  Abhukta  I  shall  first  describe 
the  remedial  measures  to  obtain  relief  from  Mula.  The  religious  remedial  rites  should  be 
performed  after  the  12th  day  after  the  birth,  the  next  Janm  Nakshatr  day,  or  on  an  auspicious 
day,  when  Candr  and  the  stars  are  favourable. 

5-8.  Erect  a  canopy  (Mandap)  with  four  arched  gateways,  embellished  with  festoons,  on  a 
sacred  spot,  besmeared  with  cow  dung  paste,  to  the  East,  or  North  of  the  house.  Prepare  there 
a  pit  (Kund),  or  place  there  a  square  vessel  of  clay,  or  metal  for  performing  Havan.  Then, 
according  to  one's  means,  prepare,  or  get  prepared  an  idol  of  Rakshasa  of  16,  8,  or  4  Masas  of 
gold,  as  may  be  possible  within  one's  means.  The  idol  should  be  with  a  horrible-looking  face, 
black  in  colour,  with  two  heads,  two  arms,  carrying  a  sword  and  a  shield  and  seated  on  a  dead 
body. 

9.  In  the  absence  of  an  idol  a  piece  of  gold  of  the  weight,  mentioned  above,  should  be  used  for 
worship,  as  gold  is  dear  to  all  the  deities. 

10-20.  Thereafter  the  remedial  rites  should  be  performed  in  the  following  order.  Select  a 
learned  priest  to  perform  the  religious  rites,  according  to  the  prescribed  procedure.  Install  a 
Kalash  and  put  in  it  Panchagavya  (five  articles,  yielded  by  a  cow,  namely  milk,  curd,  Ghl, 
dung  and  urine),  Shataushadhi  and  water  of  the  holy  river  (Ganga  etc.).  Then  install  the  idol 
of  the  Rakshasa  of  Mula,  facing  West,  on  an  earthen  pot  (Dhata)  with  one  hundred  tiny  holes. 
After  placing  bamboo  leaves  on  it,  perform  the  worship  of  the  idol  by  offering  it  white 
flowers,  sandal  and  clothes  etc.  Also  perform  worship  of  its  Adhideva  Indra  and 
Pratyadhideva  Jal.  Then  perform  Havan  to  appease  the  deities.  According  to  one's  means, 
1008,  or  108  oblations  should  be  offered  in  the  Havan.  After  this  to  obtain  deliverence  from 


death  Mrityunjaya  Mantra  etc.  should  be  recited  and  prayers  offered  to  all  the  deities  for  the 
purpose  of  Abhisheka.  The  father,  mother  and  the  child  should  thereafter  take  bath  from  the 
water  of  the  two  Kalashas.  Then  the  parents,  dressed  in  white  clothes  and  with  white  sandal 
paste,  besmeared  on  their  foreheads,  should  give  a  cow  with  calf,  as  a  Dakshina  to  the  chief 
priest  and  feed  the  other  priests  and  Brahmins,  according  to  one's  means.  Lastly,  after  reciting 
the  '  Yatapapan'  etc.  (see  verse  19)  Mantra,  the  father,  mother  and  the  child  should  see  the 
reflection  of  their  faces  in  the  (melted)  Ghl.  By  the  performance  of  the  remedial  rites  in  the 
manner  described  all  evil  effects  of  the  birth  during  Abhukta  Mula  are  completely  wiped  out. 

Ch.  94.  Remedies  from  Jyeshtha  Gandanta  Birth 

1-5.  The  Sage  said.  O  Maitreya!  Now  I  will  describe  to  you  the  remedial  measures  to  be 
adopted  to  ensure  relief  from  the  evil  effects  of  Jyeshtha  Gandanta.  The  erection  of  a  canopy 
(Mandhup),  installation  of  Kalash,  selection  of  a  priest  etc.  will  be  done  in  the  same  manner, 
as  has  been  recommended  for  the  Abhukta  Mula  in  the  previous  chapter.  In  this  ceremony 
Indra  will  be  the  deity -in-chief,  Adhideva  will  be  Agni  and  the  Pratyadhideva  will  be 
Rakshasa. 

6.  Then  the  remedial  rites  should  be  performed  in  the  following  order.  Install  on  a  Kalash,  full 
of  paddy  rice,  an  idol  of  gold  with  Indra,  seated  on  Airavat  with  Vajra  Ankusha  in  his  hands. 
Perform  worship  of  the  chief  deity  Indra  along  with  that  of  the  Adhideva  and  the 
Pratyadhideva  with  the  recitation  of  their  appropriate  Mantras.  Perform  Havan,  Abhisheka 
and  then  feed  the  Brahmins  in  accordance  with  one's  means.  In  addition  to  the  above,  after 
doing  Indrasukta  and  Mrityunjaya  Japas,  prayers  may  be  offered  to  Indra.  These  measures 
will  wipe  out  the  evil  effects  of  the  Gandanta. 

7.  In  case  the  performance  of  remedial  rites,  described  above,  is  beyond  the  means  of  any 
person,  he  should  give  a  cow  in  charily.  This  will  also  appease  the  deities  and  promote  relief 
from  the  evil  effects  of  the  Gandanta.  Because  the  giving  of  a  cow  in  charily  has  been 
considered  a  superior  remedial  measure  than  giving  in  charity  all  the  lands,  belonging  to  a 
person. 

8-9.  According  to  prescribed  remedial  measures,  3  cows  are  to  be  given  in  charity  in  the  case 
of  Jyeshtha-Mula  and  Aslesha-Magha  Gandantas,  2  cows  in  Revati-Ashvini  Gandantas  and  1 
cow  in  other  Gandantas,  or  in  any  inauspicious  Yog.  If  cow,  or  cows  are  not  available,  their 
actual  value  should  be  given  in  cash  to  a  Brahmin. 

10.  A  girl,  born  in  Jyeshtha  Nakshatr,  destroys  (is  the  cause  of  death  of)  the  elder  brother  of 
her  husband  and  a  girl,  born  in  fourth  quarter  of  Vishaka  Nakshatr,  destroys  her  husband's 
younger  brother.  Therefore  a  cow  should  be  given  in  charity  at  the  time  of  the  marriage  of 
such  girls  to  wipe  out  the  above-mentioned  evil  effects. 

11-13.  Aboy,  or  girl,  born  in  the  2nd,  3rd,  or  4th  quarter  of  Aslesha  Nakshatr,  destroys  his/her 
mother-in-law  and  a  boy,  or  a  girl,  born  in  1st,  2nd,  or  3rd  quarter  of  Mula  Nakshatr,  becomes 
the  destroyer  of  his/her  father-in-law.  Therefore  suitable  measures,  as  may  be  possible  within 
one's  means,  should  be  taken  at  the  time  of  the  marriage  of  such  boys  and  girls.  There  will  be 
no  evil  effect,  if  the  husband  has  no  elder  brothers. 


Ch.  95.  Remedies  from  Birth  of  a  Daughter  after  Three 
Sons 

1-2.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  I  will  now  tell  you  about  other  kinds  of  inauspicious  births. 
The  birth  of  a  daughter  after  the  birth  of  three  sons,  or  the  birth  of  a  son  after  the  birth  of  three 
daughters  is  ominous  for  both  the  maternal  and  paternal  families  of  such  children.  Therefore 
remedial  measures,  described  below,  may  be  taken  to  get  deliverance  from  these  evil  effects. 

3-9.  The  rites  should  be  performed  on  the  morning  next  to  the  last  day  of  Sutak,  or  on  any 
other  auspicious  day  in  the  following  order.  After  selecting  a  priest  and  some  Brahmins  to 
perform  the  remedial  religious  rites,  the  priest,  after  paying  obeisance  to  the  nine  Grahas, 
should  install  four  Kalashas  on  a  heap  of  paddy,  place  the  idols  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Mahesha 
and  Indra,  made  of  gold,  on  them  and  perform  their  worship  in  the  prescribed  manner.  A 
Brahmin  (an  assistant  of  the  priest),  after  taking  bath  etc.,  should  recite  four  Rudra  Suktas  and 
the  whole  of  Shanti  Sukta.  The  priest  should  perform  Havan  with  Samidha,  Ghl  and  sesame 
seeds  1008,  108,  or  28  times  with  the  recitation  of  the  prescribed  Mantras  of  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
Mahesha  and  Indra.  Svistkrata  and  Purnahuti  and  Abhisheka  of  the  child  with  his  family 
should  be  done  and  presents  in  cash  should  be  given  to  the  priest  and  his  assistants,  according 
to  one's  means.  The  Brahmins  should  be  fed.  The  father  and  the  mother  of  the  child  should 
see  their  reflections  in  the  Ghl,  kept  in  a  bronze  vessel.  Lastly  grains  and  clothes  should  be 
distributed  to  the  poor  and  the  needy.  By  the  performance  of  the  above  remedial  rites  the  evil 
effects  are  wiped  out  and  the  child  and  his  parents  etc.  enjoy  happiness. 

Ch.  96.  Remedies  from  Unusual  Delivery 

1-3.  The  Sage  said.  O  Brahmin!  I  will  now  tell  you  about  inauspicious  and  unusual  deliveries 
by  women,  which  are  ominous  for  the  village,  town  and  the  country.  These  may  be  of  the 
following  kinds.  Delivery  of  a  child  2,  3,  or  4  months  earlier,  or  later  from  the  approximate 
due  date.  Delivery  of  a  child  without  hands,  feet,  or  any  other  limbs,  without  head,  or  with 
two  heads.  Delivery  of  an  animal-shaped  being  by  a  woman,  or  a  human-shaped  being  by  an 
animal. 

4-5.  Deliveries  of  these  kinds  by  women,  or  cows  etc.  in  a  house  are  ominous  for  all  the 
members  of  the  family,  living  there.  Therefore  remedial  measures  are  essential  for  obtaining 
relief  from  their  evil  effects.  The  best  remedial  measure  will  be  to  abandon  (turn  out  from  the 
Bhava)  such  women  and  animals  (cows,  mares  etc.). 

6-9.  It  is  considered  inauspicious  for  a  girl  to  become  pregnant,  or  to  deliver  a  child  in  her 
15th,  or  16th  year  from  birth.  If  a  cow  delivers,  when  Surya  is  in  Simh,  or  a  female  buffalo 
delivers,  when  Surya  is  in  Makar,  they  are  disasterous  to  their  owner  and  the  person,  who 
looks  after  them.  Therefore  either  such  cow,  or  buffalo  should  be  given  away  to  a  Brahmin,  or 
suitable  remedial  measures  should  be  taken  to  escape  from  the  above-mentioned  evil  effects. 
The  remedial  measures  to  be  adopted  are  the  same,  as  given  in  verses  3-9  in  Ch.  95. 

10.  Thus,  whenever  there  is  any  kind  of  Aristha,  adoption  of  appropriate  remedial  measures 
will  ensure  long  life,  happiness  and  prosperity  for  the  person  concerned. 

Ch.  97.  Conclusion 


1-4.  Maharishi  Parasara  said.  O  Brahmin!  I  have  described  to  you  the  Jyotish  Shastra,  as 
narrated  by  Lord  Brahma  to  the  Sage  Narada  and  by  Narada  to  Shaunaka  and  other  Sages, 
from  whom  I  received  the  knowledge  of  this  Shastra.  I  have  narrated  the  same  Jyotish  Shastra, 
which  I  learnt  from  them.  Do  not  impart  the  knowledge  of  this  Shastra  to  one,  who  is 
insignificative,  slanders,  or  calumniates  others,  nor  to  one,  who  is  not  intelligent,  is  wicked 
and  unknown  to  you.  Teach  this  supreme  Vedanga  Jyotish  Shastra  only  to  one,  who  is  gentle 
and  amiable,  devoted,  truthful,  brilliant  and  well  known  to  you. 

5-6.  Only  that  person,  who  possesses  adequate  knowledge  of  time  and  the  positions  of  Grahas 
and  Nakshatras,  can  understand  this  Hora  Shastra.  Only  that  person,  who  has  complete 
knowledge  of  the  Hora  Sastra  and  who  is  truthful,  can  make  correct  favourable,  or 
unfavourable  predictions. 

7.  One,  who  reads,  or  listens  with  attention  and  devotion  to  this  most  excellent  Hora  Shastra, 
becomes  long-lived  and  is  blessed  with  increase  in  his  strength,  wealth  and  good  reputation. 

8-9.  Thus  was  narrated  by  Maharishi  Parasara  to  Maitreya  this  novel  Horasastra,  containing 
invaluable  and  uncommon  material  from  ancient  scriptures  on  Jyotish,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
world  at  large.  Afterwards  it  came  into  usage  on  the  earth  and  received  reverence  from  all. 

10-25.  In  these  verses  have  been  described  the  subject  matters  of  all  the  chapters,  contained  in 
this  book  and  their  importance.  This  information  has  been  given  in  detail  in  the  Table  of 
Contents  in  Volumes  I  and  II  of  this  book. 

